   1.Play. But who, O who, had seen the inobled Queen
   1.Play. Run bare-foot vp and downe,
   1.Play. What speech, my Lord?
   1.Player. Anon he findes him,
   Al. We will, we will
   All. Lights, Lights, Lights.
   All. Longer, longer
   All. No, let's come in
   All. Our duty to your Honour.
   Amb. The sight is dismall,
   Bap. Nor Earth to giue me food, nor Heauen light,
   Bap. So many iournies may the Sunne and Moone
   Bapt. The instances that second Marriage moue,
   Bar. 'Tis now strook twelue, get thee to bed Francisco
   Bar. I haue seene nothing
   Bar. Long liue the King
   Bar. Say, what is Horatio there?
   Bar. Sit downe a-while,
   Bar. Welcome Horatio, welcome good Marcellus
   Barn. 'Tis heere
   Barn. Haue you had quiet Guard?
   Barn. How now Horatio? You tremble & look pale:
   Barn. In the same figure, like the King that's dead
   Barn. It was about to speake, when the Cocke crew
   Barn. Last night of all,
   Barn. Lookes it not like the King? Marke it Horatio
   Barn. See, it stalkes away
   Barn. Well, goodnight. If you do meet Horatio and
   Both. My Lord, we will not
   Both. We will haste vs.
   Cap. I will doo't, my Lord
   Clo. 'Tis a quicke lye Sir, 'twill away againe from me
   Clo. A pestilence on him for a mad Rogue, a pour'd a
   Clo. How can that be, vnlesse she drowned her selfe in
   Clo. I like thy wit well in good faith, the Gallowes
   Clo. It must be Se offendendo, it cannot bee else: for
   Clo. Too't
   Clo. What is he that builds stronger then either the
   Clo. What, ar't a Heathen? how doth thou vnderstand
   Clo. Why there thou say'st. And the more pitty that
   Clo. You lye out on't Sir, and therefore it is not yours:
   Clown. Giue me leaue; heere lies the water; good:
   Clowne sings. A Pickhaxe and a Spade, a Spade,
   Clowne sings. But Age with his stealing steps
   For. Go safely on.
   For. His quarry cries on hauocke. Oh proud death,
   For. Let foure Captaines
   For. Let vs hast to heare it,
   Fran. Barnardo?
   Fran. For this releefe much thankes: 'Tis bitter cold,
   Fran. Giue you good night
   Fran. You come most carefully vpon your houre
   Gen. Good my Lord be quiet
   Gentlemen within. Hamlet, Lord Hamlet
   Gho. Marke me
   Gho. My hower is almost come,
   Gho. Pitty me not, but lend thy serious hearing
   Gho. So art thou to reuenge, when thou shalt heare
   Gho. Sweare
   Gho. Sweare
   Gho. Sweare.
   Ghost. Do not forget: this Visitation
   Ghost. I finde thee apt,
   Ghost. Sweare
   Guil. Heauens make our presence and our practises
   Guil. In what my deere Lord?
   Guil. My Lord, we were sent for
   Guil. Nor do we finde him forward to be sounded,
   Guil. We both obey,
   Guil. What should we say my Lord?
   Guil. Which dreames indeed are Ambition: for the
   Guild. Beleeue me, I cannot
   Guild. But these cannot I command to any vtterance
   Guild. But with much forcing of his disposition
   Guild. Good my Lord put your discourse into some
   Guild. Good my Lord, vouchsafe me a word with you
   Guild. Happy, in that we are not ouer-happy: on Fortunes
   Guild. I know no touch of it, my Lord
   Guild. Mine honour'd Lord?
   Guild. Nay, good my Lord, this courtesie is not of
   Guild. The King, sir
   Guild. The Queene your Mother, in most great affliction
   Guild. We will our selues prouide:
   Guild. What, my Lord?
   Ha. No good Mother, here's Mettle more attractiue
   Ham. 'Tis as easie as lying: gouerne these Ventiges
   Ham. 'Tis ee'n so; the hand of little Imployment hath
   Ham. 'Tis well, Ile haue thee speake out the rest,
   Ham. A Murderer, and a Villaine:
   Ham. A dreame it selfe is but a shadow
   Ham. A goodly one, in which there are many Confines,
   Ham. A whole one I,
   Ham. Alas poore Ghost
   Ham. Am I not i'th' right old Iephta?
   Ham. An earnest Coniuration from the King,
   Ham. And fixt his eyes vpon you?
   Ham. And smelt so? Puh
   Ham. And therefore as a stranger giue it welcome.
   Ham. And what did you enact?
   Ham. Angels and Ministers of Grace defend vs:
   Ham. Are you faire?
   Ham. Arm'd, say you?
   Ham. As Womans loue.
   Ham. As th'art a man, giue me the Cup.
   Ham. Be not too tame neyther: but let your owne
   Ham. Begger that I am, I am euen poore in thankes;
   Ham. Being thus benetted round with Villaines,
   Ham. Bid the Players make hast.
   Ham. But where was this?
   Ham. Buzze, buzze
   Ham. Come for the third.
   Ham. Come on sir
   Ham. Come show me what thou'lt doe.
   Ham. Come, come, and sit you downe, you shall not
   Ham. Did you not speake to it?
   Ham. Do not beleeue it
   Ham. Do the Boyes carry it away?
   Ham. Do you not come your tardy Sonne to chide,
   Ham. Do you see that Clowd? that's almost in shape
   Ham. Do you thinke I meant Country matters?
   Ham. Extasie?
   Ham. For England?
   Ham. For Heauens loue let me heare
   Ham. For if the Sun breed Magots in a dead dogge,
   Ham. From top to toe?
   Ham. Gentlemen, you are welcom to Elsonower: your
   Ham. Get thee to a Nunnerie. Why would'st thou
   Ham. Giue me your pardon Sir, I'ue done you wrong,
   Ham. Go, go, you question with an idle tongue
   Ham. Gods bodykins man, better. Vse euerie man
   Ham. Good
   Ham. Good Madam
   Ham. Ha's this fellow no feeling of his businesse, that
   Ham. Ha, ha: Are you honest?
   Ham. Hast, hast me to know it,
   Ham. He did Complie with his Dugge before hee
   Ham. He that playes the King shall be welcome; his
   Ham. He was a man, take him for all in all:
   Ham. He will stay till ye come
   Ham. Heare you Sir:
   Ham. Hearke you Guildensterne, and you too: at each
   Ham. Heere thou incestuous, murdrous,
   Ham. Hic & vbique? Then wee'l shift for grownd,
   Ham. Hillo, ho, ho, boy; come bird, come
   Ham. His Beard was grisly? no
   Ham. Hold off your hand
   Ham. Horatio, thou art eene as iust a man
   Ham. How absolute the knaue is? wee must speake
   Ham. How came he mad?
   Ham. How chances it they trauaile? their residence
   Ham. How comes it? doe they grow rusty?
   Ham. How does the Queene?
   Ham. How if I answere no?
   Ham. How is it with you Lady?
   Ham. How long is that since?
   Ham. How long will a man lie i'th' earth ere he rot?
   Ham. How now, a Rat? dead for a Ducate, dead
   Ham. How say you then, would heart of man once think it?
   Ham. How strangely?
   Ham. I Madam, it is common
   Ham. I am glad of it: a knauish speech sleepes in a
   Ham. I am glad to see you well:
   Ham. I am tame Sir, pronounce
   Ham. I am very glad to see you: good euen Sir.
   Ham. I beseech you remember
   Ham. I could interpret betweene you and your loue:
   Ham. I dare not drinke yet Madam,
   Ham. I do beseech you
   Ham. I do embrace it freely,
   Ham. I do not well vnderstand that. Will you play
   Ham. I doe not thinke so, since he went into France,
   Ham. I haue heard of your pratlings too wel enough.
   Ham. I humbly thank you Sir, dost know this waterflie?
   Ham. I marry, why was he sent into England?
   Ham. I meane, my Head vpon your Lap?
   Ham. I must to England, you know that?
   Ham. I pray thee doe not mock me (fellow Student)
   Ham. I pray you
   Ham. I see a Cherube that see's him: but come, for
   Ham. I shall in all my best
   Ham. I sir, what of him?
   Ham. I thinke it be thine indeed: for thou liest in't
   Ham. I will
   Ham. I will Prophesie. Hee comes to tell me of the
   Ham. I will receiue it with all diligence of spirit; put
   Ham. I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation
   Ham. I would I had beene there
   Ham. I would not haue your Enemy say so;
   Ham. I'm sorry they offend you heartily:
   Ham. If it assume my noble Fathers person,
   Ham. If she should breake it now
   Ham. If thou doest Marry, Ile giue thee this Plague
   Ham. Ile be your foile Laertes, in mine ignorance,
   Ham. Ile watch to Night; perchance 'twill wake againe
   Ham. In heauen, send thither to see. If your Messenger
   Ham. In the secret parts of Fortune? Oh, most true:
   Ham. Indeed, indeed Sirs; but this troubles me.
   Ham. Indeed, vpon my sword, Indeed
   Ham. Is not Parchment made of Sheep-skinnes?
   Ham. Is this a Prologue, or the Poesie of a Ring?
   Ham. Is't possible?
   Ham. It is but foolery; but it is such a kinde of
   Ham. It is not strange: for mine Vnckle is King of
   Ham. It shall to'th Barbars, with your beard. Prythee
   Ham. It was a bruite part of him, to kill so Capitall a
   Ham. It will be short,
   Ham. It will not speake: then will I follow it
   Ham. It would cost you a groaning, to take off my
   Ham. Iudgement
   Ham. Let her not walke i'thSunne: Conception is a
   Ham. Let me see. Alas poore Yorick, I knew him Horatio,
   Ham. Let the doores be shut vpon him, that he may
   Ham. Looke heere vpon this Picture, and on this,
   Ham. Me thinkes it is like a Weazell
   Ham. Mee thinkes it is very soultry, and hot for my
   Ham. Mother, you haue my Father much offended
   Ham. Murther?
   Ham. My Lord, I haue Newes to tell you.
   Ham. My fate cries out,
   Ham. Nay come, againe
   Ham. Nay that followes not
   Ham. Nay, but swear't
   Ham. Nay, but to liue
   Ham. Nay, do not thinke I flatter:
   Ham. Neuer make known what you haue seen to night
   Ham. Neuer to speake of this that you haue seene.
   Ham. No by this hand
   Ham. No faith, not a iot. But to follow him thether
   Ham. No such matter. I will not sort you with the
   Ham. No you'l reueale it
   Ham. No, beleeue mee 'tis very cold, the winde is
   Ham. No, no, I neuer gaue you ought
   Ham. No, nor mine. Now my Lord, you plaid once
   Ham. Nor did you nothing heare?
   Ham. Nor the Soales of her Shoo?
   Ham. Not a whit, we defie Augury; there's a speciall
   Ham. O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell, and
   Ham. O I dye Horatio:
   Ham. O Iephta Iudge of Israel, what a Treasure had'st
   Ham. O my Propheticke soule: mine Vncle?
   Ham. O reforme it altogether. And let those that
   Ham. O throw away the worser part of it,
   Ham. Oh God, your onely Iigge-maker: what should
   Ham. Oh Heauen!
   Ham. Oh Villany! How? Let the doore be lock'd.
   Ham. Oh but shee'l keepe her word
   Ham. Oh good Horatio, Ile take the Ghosts word for
   Ham. Oh wonderfull Sonne, that can so astonish a
   Ham. Or like a Whale?
   Ham. Or of a Courtier, which could say, Good Morrow
   Ham. Pale, or red?
   Ham. Rest, rest perturbed Spirit: so Gentlemen,
   Ham. Saw? Who?
   Ham. Seemes Madam? Nay, it is: I know not Seemes:
   Ham. Sir I lacke Aduancement
   Ham. Sir my good friend,
   Ham. Sir, I cannot
   Ham. Sir, I will walke heere in the Hall; if it please
   Ham. Sir, a whole History
   Ham. Slanders Sir: for the Satyricall slaue saies here,
   Ham. So I do still, by these pickers and stealers
   Ham. So long? Nay then let the Diuel weare blacke,
   Ham. So much for this Sir; now let me see the other,
   Ham. So you mistake Husbands.
   Ham. Speake, I am bound to heare
   Ham. That Scull had a tongue in it, and could sing
   Ham. That's a faire thought to ly betweene Maids legs
   Ham. That's two of his weapons; but well
   Ham. The King my Father?
   Ham. The body is with the King, but the King is not
   Ham. The inobled Queene?
   Ham. The phrase would bee more Germaine to the
   Ham. The point envenom'd too,
   Ham. Then I would you were so honest a man
   Ham. Then are our Beggers bodies; and our Monarchs
   Ham. Then can each Actor on his Asse-
   Ham. Then is Doomesday neere: But your newes is
   Ham. Then saw you not his face?
   Ham. Then will I come to my Mother, by and by:
   Ham. Then you liue about her waste, or in the middle
   Ham. There's another: why might not that bee the
   Ham. There's nere a villaine dwelling in all Denmarke
   Ham. These tedious old fooles
   Ham. They are Sheepe and Calues that seek out assurance
   Ham. This likes me well,
   Ham. This man shall set me packing:
   Ham. This?
   Ham. Thou dost lye in't, to be in't and say 'tis thine:
   Ham. Thou prai'st not well,
   Ham. Thrift thrift Horatio: the Funerall Bakt-meats
   Ham. Thy state is the more gracious; for 'tis a vice to
   Ham. Tis very strange
   Ham. To what base vses we may returne Horatio.
   Ham. Verie well my Lord,
   Ham. Very like, very like: staid it long?
   Ham. Very well. Follow that Lord, and looke you
   Ham. Vp from my Cabin
   Ham. Vpon my sword
   Ham. Vpon the talke of the poysoning?
   Ham. Vpon what ground?
   Ham. We shall obey, were she ten times our Mother.
   Ham. Wee'l ha't to morrow night. You could for a
   Ham. Well said old Mole, can'st worke i'th' ground so fast?
   Ham. What are they Children? Who maintains 'em?
   Ham. What call you the Carriages?
   Ham. What hower now?
   Ham. What is he, whose griefes
   Ham. What man dost thou digge it for?
   Ham. What noise? Who cals on Hamlet?
   Ham. What woman then?
   Ham. What's his weapon?
   Ham. What, frighted with false fire
   Ham. What, lookt he frowningly?
   Ham. What?
   Ham. Who is to be buried in't?
   Ham. Whose was it?
   Ham. Why I will fight with him vppon this Theme.
   Ham. Why did you laugh, when I said, Man delights
   Ham. Why ee'n so: and now my Lady Wormes,
   Ham. Why he, more then another?
   Ham. Why look you there: looke how it steals away:
   Ham. Why looke you now, how vnworthy a thing
   Ham. Why man, they did make loue to this imployment
   Ham. Why right, you are i'th' right;
   Ham. Why then 'tis none to you; for there is nothing
   Ham. Why, what should be the feare?
   Ham. Why?
   Ham. With drinke Sir?
   Ham. Wormwood, Wormwood
   Ham. Yes, by Saint Patricke, but there is my Lord,
   Ham. You are welcome
   Ham. You cannot Sir take from me any thing, that I
   Ham. You should not haue beleeued me. For vertue
   Ham. Your loue, as mine to you: farewell.
   Ham. Your wisedome should shew it selfe more richer,
   Ham. Yours, yours; hee does well to commend it
   Ham. within. Mother, mother, mother
   Hamlet. My Mother: Father and Mother is man and
   Hor. & Mar. within. My Lord, my Lord.
   Hor. 'Tis heere
   Hor. 'Twere to consider: to curiously to consider so
   Hor. And then it started, like a guilty thing
   Hor. As I doe liue my honourd Lord 'tis true;
   Hor. Be rul'd, you shall not goe
   Hor. Doe not my Lord
   Hor. E'ene so, my Lord
   Hor. Halfe a share
   Hor. Haue after, to what issue will this come?
   Hor. Heauen secure him
   Hor. Heauen will direct it
   Hor. How was this seal'd?
   Hor. I warrant you it will
   Hor. If your minde dislike any thing, obey. I will forestall
   Hor. Illo, ho, ho, my Lord
   Hor. In what particular thought to work, I know not:
   Hor. Indeed I heard it not: then it drawes neere the season,
   Hor. Indeed my Lord, it followed hard vpon
   Hor. Infaith my Lord, not I
   Hor. Ist possible?
   Hor. It must be shortly knowne to him from England
   Hor. It was, as I haue seene it in his life,
   Hor. It would haue much amaz'd you
   Hor. Let him blesse thee too
   Hor. Let them come in,
   Hor. My Lord, I came to see your Fathers Funerall
   Hor. My Lord, I thinke I saw him yesternight
   Hor. Nay, good my Lord
   Hor. Neuer beleeue it.
   Hor. No, by no meanes
   Hor. Not I, my Lord, by Heauen
   Hor. Not when I saw't
   Hor. Oh day and night: but this is wondrous strange
   Hor. Oh where my Lord?
   Hor. Peace, who comes heere?
   Hor. Propose the Oath my Lord
   Hor. Remember it my Lord?
   Hor. She is importunate, indeed distract, her moode
   Hor. So Guildensterne and Rosincrance, go too't
   Hor. So haue I heard, and do in part beleeue it.
   Hor. Stay: speake; speake: I Charge thee, speake.
   Hor. That is most certaine
   Hor. The same my Lord,
   Hor. There needs no Ghost my Lord, come from the
   Hor. There's no offence my Lord
   Hor. These are but wild and hurling words, my Lord
   Hor. They bleed on both sides. How is't my Lord?
   Hor. This Lapwing runs away with the shell on his
   Hor. Tush, tush, 'twill not appeare
   Hor. Two nights together, had these Gentlemen
   Hor. Well, sit we downe,
   Hor. What art thou that vsurp'st this time of night,
   Hor. What if it tempt you toward the Floud my Lord?
   Hor. What is't my Lord? we will
   Hor. What's that my Lord?
   Hor. Why, what a King is this?
   Hor. You will lose this wager, my Lord
   Hora. Most like: It harrowes me with fear & wonder
   Hora. O my deere Lord
   Hora. Well my Lord.
   Hora. You might haue Rim'd
   Horat. Is it a custome?
   K. Hamlet, this deed of thine, for thine especial safety
   Kin. Hee mad confession of you,
   Kin. If it be so Laertes, as how should it be so:
   Kin. Let's further thinke of this,
   Kin. No place indeed should murder Sancturize;
   Kin. The very same
   Kin. This is meere Madnesse:
   Kin. To thine owne peace: if he be now return'd,
   King. 'Tis deepely sworne:
   King. 'Tis sweet and commendable
   King. Arme you, I pray you to this speedie Voyage;
   King. At Supper? Where?
   King. Breake not your sleepes for that,
   King. Bring him before vs
   King. But how hath she receiu'd his Loue?
   King. But where is he?
   King. Conceit vpon her Father
   King. Do you thinke 'tis this?
   King. Faith I must leaue thee Loue, and shortly too:
   King. From Hamlet? Who brought them?
   King. Gertrude, do not drinke
   King. Giue me some Light. Away
   King. Giue them the Foyles yong Osricke,
   King. Go seeke him there
   King. Good Laertes:
   King. Haue you heard the Argument, is there no Offence
   King. Haue you your Fathers leaue?
   King. How do ye, pretty Lady?
   King. How fares our Cosin Hamlet?
   King. How is it that the Clouds still hang on you?
   King. How long hath she bin thus?
   King. How may we try it further?
   King. I do beleeue you. Think what now you speak:
   King. I do not feare it,
   King. I do not thinke't
   King. I haue nothing with this answer Hamlet, these
   King. It is the poyson'd Cup, it is too late
   King. It likes vs well:
   King. It shall be so:
   King. Laertes you shall heare them:
   King. Let him demand his fill
   King. O yet defend me Friends, I am but hurt
   King. Oh 'tis true:
   King. Oh Gertrude, come away:
   King. Oh heauy deed:
   King. Oh speake of that, that I do long to heare
   King. Our Sonne shall win
   King. Pluck them asunder
   King. Pretty Ophelia
   King. Set me the Stopes of wine vpon that Table:
   King. So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes
   King. So you shall:
   King. Stay, giue me drinke.
   King. Take thy faire houre Laertes, time be thine,
   King. Thankes Rosincrance, and gentle Guildensterne
   King. Thankes deere my Lord.
   King. Thou still hast bin the father of good Newes
   King. Thy louing Father Hamlet
   King. Thy selfe do grace to them, and bring them in.
   King. We doubt it nothing, heartily farewell.
   King. We will try it.
   King. What do you call the Play?
   King. What dost thou meane by this?
   King. What is the cause Laertes,
   King. Where is Polonius
   King. Who shall stay you?
   King. Why 'tis a louing, and a faire Reply,
   King. Why now you speake
   King. Will you know them then
   King. With all my heart, and it doth much content me
   La. To his good Friends, thus wide Ile ope my Armes:
   Laer. A Norman was't?
   Laer. A document in madnesse, thoughts & remembrance
   Laer. Alas then, is she drown'd?
   Laer. And so haue I a Noble Father lost,
   Laer. And yet 'tis almost 'gainst my conscience
   Laer. Come on sir.
   Laer. Come one for me
   Laer. Drown'd! O where?
   Laer. Farewell Ophelia, and remember well
   Laer. Farewell.
   Laer. Had'st thou thy wits, and did'st perswade Reuenge,
   Laer. Haue at you now.
   Laer. How came he dead? Ile not be Iuggel'd with.
   Laer. I am satisfied in Nature,
   Laer. I know him well, he is the Brooch indeed,
   Laer. I pray you giue me leaue
   Laer. I thanke you: Keepe the doore.
   Laer. I will doo't.
   Laer. It is heere Hamlet.
   Laer. It well appeares. But tell me,
   Laer. Lay her i'th' earth,
   Laer. Let this be so:
   Laer. Most humbly doe I take my leaue, my Lord
   Laer. Must there no more be done ?
   Laer. My Lord, Ile hit him now
   Laer. No
   Laer. None but his Enemies
   Laer. Oh terrible woer,
   Laer. Oh, feare me not.
   Laer. Say you so? Come on.
   Laer. That drop of blood, that calmes
   Laer. The deuill take thy soule
   Laer. Thinke it no more:
   Laer. This is too heauy,
   Laer. This nothings more then matter
   Laer. Thought, and Affliction, Passion, Hell it selfe:
   Laer. Too much of water hast thou poore Ophelia,
   Laer. Vpon my life Lamound
   Laer. Well: againe
   Laer. What Cerimony else?
   Laer. What Cerimony else?
   Laer. Where is the King, sirs? Stand you all without
   Laer. Where's my Father?
   Laer. Why out of this, my Lord?
   Laer. You mocke me Sir
   Lucian. Thoughts blacke, hands apt,
   Mar. 'Tis gone.
   Mar. And Leige-men to the Dane
   Mar. Good now sit downe, & tell me he that knowes
   Mar. Horatio saies, 'tis but our Fantasie,
   Mar. How ist my Noble Lord?
   Mar. Is it not like the King?
   Mar. It faded on the crowing of the Cocke.
   Mar. It is offended
   Mar. Let's follow; 'tis not fit thus to obey him
   Mar. Looke with what courteous action
   Mar. My good Lord
   Mar. Nay, let's follow him.
   Mar. No, it is strooke
   Mar. Nor I my Lord: in faith
   Mar. Nor I, my Lord
   Mar. O farwel honest Soldier, who hath relieu'd you?
   Mar. Peace, breake thee of:
   Mar. Question it Horatio
   Mar. Shall I strike at it with my Partizan?
   Mar. So be it
   Mar. Thou art a Scholler; speake to it Horatio
   Mar. Thus twice before, and iust at this dead houre,
   Mar. What, ha's this thing appear'd againe to night
   Mar. You shall not goe my Lord
   Marcell. We haue sworne my Lord already
   Ophe. And hath giuen countenance to his speech,
   Ophe. And will he not come againe,
   Ophe. Belike this shew imports the Argument of the
   Ophe. Could Beautie my Lord, haue better Comerce
   Ophe. Good my Lord,
   Ophe. I shall obey my Lord.
   Ophe. I shall th' effect of this good Lesson keepe,
   Ophe. I was the more deceiued
   Ophe. Indeed la? without an oath Ile make an end ont.
   Ophe. Indeed my Lord, you made me beleeue so
   Ophe. Larded with sweet Flowers:
   Ophe. Madam, I wish it may
   Ophe. My Lord, I haue Remembrances of yours,
   Ophe. My Lord, he hath importun'd me with loue,
   Ophe. My honor'd Lord, I know right well you did,
   Ophe. Nay, 'tis twice two moneths, my Lord
   Ophe. O heauenly Powers, restore him
   Ophe. O helpe him, you sweet Heauens
   Ophe. Pray you let's haue no words of this: but when
   Ophe. Pray you marke.
   Ophe. Still better and worse
   Ophe. The King rises
   Ophe. There's Fennell for you, and Columbines: ther's
   Ophe. There's Rosemary, that's for Remembraunce.
   Ophe. They bore him bare fac'd on the Beer,
   Ophe. Tis in my memory lockt,
   Ophe. Will they tell vs what this shew meant?
   Ophe. You are a good Chorus, my Lord
   Ophe. You are keene my Lord, you are keene
   Ophe. You are merrie, my Lord?
   Ophe. You are naught, you are naught, Ile marke the
   Ophe. You must sing downe a-downe, and you call
   Ophel. Doe you doubt that?
   Ophel. No more but so
   Osr. A hit, a very palpable hit
   Osr. Exceedingly, my Lord, it is very soultry, as 'twere
   Osr. I commend my duty to your Lordship
   Osr. I thanke your Lordship, 'tis very hot
   Osr. It is indifferent cold my Lord indeed
   Osr. Looke to the Queene there hoa
   Osr. Nay, in good faith, for mine ease in good faith:
   Osr. Shall I redeliuer you ee'n so?
   Osr. Sweet Lord, if your friendship were at leysure,
   Osr. The sir King ha's wag'd with him six Barbary horses,
   Other. But is this law?
   Other. Marry, now I can tell
   Other. Masse, I cannot tell.
   Other. Nay but heare you Goodman Deluer
   Other. Was he a Gentleman?
   Other. Who builds stronger then a Mason, a Shipwright,
   Other. Why he had none
   Other. Will you ha the truth on't: if this had not
   Play. I hope we haue reform'd that indifferently with
   Player. I warrant your Honor
   Pol. 'Tis most true:
   Pol. At such a time Ile loose my Daughter to him,
   Pol. Away I do beseech you, both away,
   Pol. Come sirs.
   Pol. Do you know me, my Lord?
   Pol. Fore God, my Lord, well spoken, with good accent,
   Pol. Giue first admittance to th' Ambassadors,
   Pol. Good Madam stay awhile, I will be faithfull.
   Pol. Hath there bene such a time, I'de fain know that,
   Pol. Haue I, my Lord? Assure you, my good Liege,
   Pol. Honest, my Lord?
   Pol. How say you by that? Still harping on my daughter:
   Pol. I wold faine proue so. But what might you think?
   Pol. Looke where he ha's not turn'd his colour, and
   Pol. Madam, I sweare I vse no Art at all:
   Pol. My Lord, I haue Newes to tell you
   Pol. My Lord, I will vse them according to their desart
   Pol. Not I my Lord
   Pol. Oh I am slaine.
   Pol. Oh ho, do you marke that?
   Pol. Ophelia, walke you heere. Gracious so please ye
   Pol. Still on my Daughter
   Pol. Take this from this; if this be otherwise,
   Pol. That hath made him mad.
   Pol. That's very true, my Lord
   Pol. This is too long
   Pol. Though this be madnesse,
   Pol. Vpon mine Honor
   Pol. What hoa, helpe, helpe, helpe
   Pol. What is the matter, my Lord?
   Polon. Affection, puh. You speake like a greene Girle,
   Polon. And in part him, but you may say not well;
   Polon. And let him plye his Musicke
   Polon. And then Sir does he this?
   Polon. At closes in the consequence, I marry,
   Polon. By'th' Masse, and it's like a Camell indeed
   Polon. Faith no, as you may season it in the charge;
   Polon. Fare you well my Lord
   Polon. God buy you; fare you well
   Polon. Goe with me, I will goe seeke the King,
   Polon. I will say so.
   Polon. I, Springes to catch Woodcocks. I doe know
   Polon. I, fashion you may call it, go too, go too
   Polon. I, or drinking, fencing, swearing,
   Polon. It is back'd like a Weazell
   Polon. Mad for thy Loue?
   Polon. Marry Ile teach you; thinke your selfe a Baby,
   Polon. Marry Sir, heere's my drift,
   Polon. Marry, well bethought:
   Polon. Marry, well said;
   Polon. Obserue his inclination in your selfe
   Polon. The time inuites you, goe, your seruants tend
   Polon. What followes then, my Lord?
   Polon. What said he?
   Polon. Wherefore should you doe this?
   Polon. With what, in the name of Heauen?
   Polon. Yet heere Laertes? Aboord, aboord for shame,
   Polon. You goe to seeke my Lord Hamlet; there
   Polon. You shall doe maruels wisely: good Reynoldo,
   Qu. 'Twere good she were spoken with,
   Qu. Alas sweet Lady: what imports this Song?
   Qu. Alas, looke heere my Lord
   Qu. As kill a King?
   Qu. Aye me; what act, that roares so lowd, & thunders
   Qu. Be thou assur'd, if words be made of breath,
   Qu. But not by him
   Qu. Calmely good Laertes
   Qu. Came this from Hamlet to her
   Qu. Come hither my good Hamlet, sit by me
   Qu. Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue
   Qu. Come, let me wipe thy face
   Qu. Did he receiue you well?
   Qu. Did you assay him to any pastime?
   Qu. Good Gentlemen, he hath much talk'd of you,
   Qu. Hamlet, Hamlet
   Qu. He's fat, and scant of breath.
   Qu. How cheerefully on the false Traile they cry,
   Qu. How fares my Lord?
   Qu. How now Ophelia?
   Qu. I doubt it is no other, but the maine,
   Qu. I shall obey you,
   Qu. I will my Lord;
   Qu. Ile warrant you, feare me not.
   Qu. Let not thy Mother lose her Prayers Hamlet:
   Qu. More matter, with lesse Art
   Qu. Nay, then Ile set those to you that can speake
   Qu. No more.
   Qu. No, no, the drinke, the drinke.
   Qu. O Hamlet, speake no more.
   Qu. Oh Hamlet,
   Qu. Oh me, what hast thou done?
   Qu. Oh my Sonne, what Theame?
   Qu. Oh speake to me, no more,
   Qu. Sleepe rocke thy Braine,
   Qu. So he ha's indeed
   Qu. Thankes Guildensterne and gentle Rosincrance.
   Qu. To who do you speake this?
   Qu. What haue I done, that thou dar'st wag thy tong,
   Qu. What shall I do?
   Qu. What would she haue?
   Qu. Why how now Hamlet?
   Queen. Good Hamlet cast thy nightly colour off,
   Queen. If it be;
   Reynol. As gaming my Lord
   Reynol. But my good Lord
   Reynol. Good my Lord
   Reynol. I shall my Lord
   Reynol. I will my Lord
   Reynol. My Lord that would dishonour him
   Reynol. My Lord, I did intend it
   Reynol. Very good my Lord
   Reynol. Well, my Lord.
   Rosin. Beleeue what?
   Rosin. Both your Maiesties
   Rosin. Faith there ha's bene much to do on both sides:
   Rosin. Good my Lord, what is your cause of distemper?
   Rosin. Happily he's the second time come to them: for
   Rosin. He does confesse he feeles himselfe distracted,
   Rosin. Hoa, Guildensterne? Bring in my Lord.
   Rosin. How can that be, when you haue the voyce of
   Rosin. I thinke their Inhibition comes by the meanes
   Rosin. I vnderstand you not my Lord
   Rosin. My Lord, there was no such stuffe in my
   Rosin. My Lord, you must tell vs where the body is,
   Rosin. Niggard of question, but of our demands
   Rosin. Take you me for a Spundge, my Lord?
   Rosin. Tell vs where 'tis, that we may take it thence,
   Rosin. The single
   Rosin. Then is the World one
   Rosin. Then thus she sayes: your behauior hath stroke
   Rosin. To what end my Lord?
   Rosin. Truely, and I hold Ambition of so ayry and
   Rosin. We shall my Lord.
   Rosin. We thinke not so my Lord
   Rosin. What say you?
   Rosin. Why then your Ambition makes it one: 'tis
   Say. Hee shall Sir, and't please him. There's a Letter
   Volt. In that, and all things, will we shew our duty
  All. Treason, Treason
  Bap. Oh confound the rest:
  Bar. He
  Barn. It would be spoke too
  Barnardo. Who's there?
  Both. Arm'd, my Lord
  Both. I, by Heau'n, my Lord
  Both. My Lord, from head to foote
  Both. We doe my Lord
  Both. We will my Lord.
  Both. Wee'l wait vpon you
  Clo. 'Twill not be seene in him, there the men are as
  Clo. A whoreson mad Fellowes it was;
  Clo. Cannot you tell that? euery foole can tell that:
  Clo. Cudgell thy braines no more about it; for your
  Clo. E'ene that
  Clo. Faith e'ene with loosing his wits
  Clo. For no man Sir
  Clo. For none neither
  Clo. He was the first that euer bore Armes
  Clo. I marry is't, Crowners Quest Law
  Clo. I, tell me that, and vnyoake
  Clo. Ifaith, if he be not rotten before he die (as we haue
  Clo. Mine Sir:
  Clo. Of all the dayes i'th' yeare, I came too't that day
  Clo. One that was a woman Sir; but rest her Soule,
  Clo. Very strangely they say
  Clo. Why heere in Denmarke: I haue bin sixeteene
  Clo. Why sir, his hide is so tan'd with his Trade, that
  Clo. Why, because he was mad; hee shall recouer his
  Clown. Is she to bee buried in Christian buriall, that
  For. Go Captaine, from me greet the Danish King,
  Fortin. Where is this sight?
  Fra. Barnardo ha's my place: giue you goodnight.
  Fran. I thinke I heare them. Stand: who's there?
  Fran. Nay answer me: Stand & vnfold
  Fran. Not a Mouse stirring
  Gho. I am thy Fathers Spirit,
  Gho. Reuenge his foule and most vnnaturall Murther
  Ghost. I that incestuous, that adulterate Beast
  Ghost. Murther most foule, as in the best it is;
  Guil. Faith, her priuates, we
  Guil. Prison, my Lord?
  Guil. There are the Players
  Guild. A thing my Lord?
  Guild. Is in his retyrement, maruellous distemper'd
  Guild. My Lord, I cannot
  Guild. No my Lord, rather with choller
  Guild. O my Lord, if my Dutie be too bold, my loue
  Guild. Oh there ha's beene much throwing about of
  Ha. Why, As by lot, God wot: and then you know, It
  Ham. A King of shreds and patches.
  Ham. A bloody deed, almost as bad good Mother,
  Ham. A little more then kin, and lesse then kinde
  Ham. Ah ha boy, sayest thou so. Art thou there truepenny?
  Ham. At Supper
  Ham. Betweene who?
  Ham. By and by, is easily said. Leaue me Friends:
  Ham. Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis Kinne
  Ham. Denmark's a Prison
  Ham. Do you see nothing there?
  Ham. Doe they hold the same estimation they did
  Ham. Does it not, thinkst thee, stand me now vpon
  Ham. Dost thou thinke Alexander lookt o'this fashion
  Ham. Excellent Ifaith, of the Camelions dish: I eate
  Ham. Excellent, excellent well: y'are a Fishmonger
  Ham. Follow him Friends: wee'l heare a play to morrow.
  Ham. He poysons him i'th' Garden for's estate: His
  Ham. Heauen make thee free of it, I follow thee.
  Ham. Here's the Commission, read it at more leysure:
  Ham. I Lady, 'twas my word.
  Ham. I am but mad North, North-West: when the
  Ham. I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was
  Ham. I humbly thanke you: well, well, well
  Ham. I lou'd Ophelia; fortie thousand Brothers
  Ham. I marry ist;
  Ham. I sir, that sokes vp the Kings Countenance, his
  Ham. I sir, to be honest as this world goes, is to bee
  Ham. I so, God buy'ye: Now I am alone.
  Ham. I trulie: for the power of Beautie, will sooner
  Ham. I, but while the grasse growes, the Prouerbe is
  Ham. I, or any shew that you'l shew him. Bee not
  Ham. Ile play this bout first, set by a-while.
  Ham. In my minds eye (Horatio)
  Ham. Into my Graue?
  Ham. It wafts me still: goe on, Ile follow thee
  Ham. Ladie, shall I lye in your Lap?
  Ham. Madam, how like you this Play?
  Ham. Make you a wholsome answere: my wits diseas'd.
  Ham. Marry this is Miching Malicho, that meanes
  Ham. My excellent good friends? How do'st thou
  Ham. Nay I know not, is it the King?
  Ham. Nay then I haue an eye of you: if you loue me
  Ham. Nay, I know not
  Ham. No by the Rood, not so:
  Ham. No, no, they do but iest, poyson in iest, no Offence
  Ham. Not so my Lord, I am too much i'th' Sun
  Ham. Not this by no meanes that I bid you do:
  Ham. Not where he eats, but where he is eaten, a certaine
  Ham. Nothing
  Ham. Nothing but to shew you how a King may go
  Ham. Now Mother, what's the matter?
  Ham. Now might I do it pat, now he is praying,
  Ham. Of nothing: bring me to him, hide Fox, and all
  Ham. Oh all you host of Heauen! Oh Earth; what els?
  Ham. Oh that this too too solid Flesh, would melt,
  Ham. Oh wonderfull!
  Ham. Oh, ha? Come some Musick. Come y Recorders:
  Ham. On him, on him: look you how pale he glares,
  Ham. One
  Ham. Safely stowed
  Ham. Sir, in my heart there was a kinde of fighting,
  Ham. Speake the Speech I pray you, as I pronounc'd
  Ham. Such an Act
  Ham. That I can keepe your counsell, and not mine
  Ham. That if you be honest and faire, your Honesty
  Ham. That is Laertes, a very Noble youth: Marke
  Ham. That you must teach me: but let mee coniure
  Ham. The Ayre bites shrewdly: is it very cold?
  Ham. The King doth wake to night, and takes his rouse,
  Ham. The Mouse-trap: Marry how? Tropically:
  Ham. They are comming to the Play: I must be idle.
  Ham. To be, or not to be, that is the Question:
  Ham. To this effect Sir, after what flourish your nature
  Ham. We shall know by these Fellowes: the Players
  Ham. Well, God-a-mercy
  Ham. What hoa, Horatio?
  Ham. What, the faire Ophelia?
  Ham. Whats the matter now?
  Ham. Where wilt thou lead me? speak; Ile go no further
  Ham. Who I?
  Ham. Why any thing. But to the purpose; you were
  Ham. Why let the strucken Deere go weepe,
  Ham. Why one faire Daughter, and no more,
  Ham. Why, euen in that was Heauen ordinate;
  Ham. Words, words, words
  Hor. A countenance more in sorrow then in anger
  Hor. A peece of him
  Hor. A truant disposition, good my Lord
  Hor. As thou art to thy selfe,
  Hor. Before my God, I might not this beleeue
  Hor. Custome hath made it in him a property of easinesse
  Hor. Do, if it will not stand
  Hor. E'ene so
  Hor. Friends to this ground
  Hor. Good my Lord tell it
  Hor. Haile to your Lordship
  Hor. He waxes desperate with imagination
  Hor. I beseech you
  Hor. I my Lord, and of Calue-skinnes too
  Hor. I saw him once; he was a goodly King
  Hor. I thinke it lacks of twelue
  Hor. I, good my Lord
  Hor. I, my Lord
  Hor. It beckons you to goe away with it,
  Hor. It is a nipping and an eager ayre
  Hor. It might, my Lord
  Hor. Looke my Lord, it comes
  Hor. Most constantly
  Hor. My Lord, I did;
  Hor. My Lord, the King your Father
  Hor. Nay very pale
  Hor. No my good Lord
  Hor. Not a iot more, my Lord
  Hor. Not from his mouth,
  Hor. O yes, my Lord, he wore his Beauer vp
  Hor. Of that I shall haue alwayes cause to speake,
  Hor. Season your admiration for a while
  Hor. She speakes much of her Father; saies she heares
  Hor. That can I,
  Hor. What is it ye would see;
  Hor. What newes, my Lord?
  Hor. While one with moderate hast might tell a hundred
  Hora. Heere sweet Lord, at your Seruice
  Hora. I did verie well note him.
  Hora. Now cracke a Noble heart:
  Hora. Verie well my Lord
  Hora. What are they that would speake with me?
  Kin. 'Tis Hamlets Character, naked and in a Postscript
  Kin. A Norman
  Kin. Come Hamlet, come, and take this hand from me
  Kin. I pray you good Horatio wait vpon him,
  Kin. Laertes was your Father deare to you?
  Kin. Let's follow, Gertrude:
  Kin. Not that I thinke you did not loue your Father,
  King. And can you by no drift of circumstance
  King. As of a man, faithfull and Honourable
  King. Dead
  King. Follow her close,
  King. Follow him at foote,
  King. Full thirtie times hath Phoebus Cart gon round,
  King. I Hamlet
  King. I haue sent to seeke him, and to find the bodie:
  King. I like him not, nor stands it safe with vs,
  King. Laertes, I must common with your greefe,
  King. Loue? His affections do not that way tend,
  King. My words flye vp, my thoughts remain below,
  King. Not that I know
  King. Now Hamlet, where's Polonius?
  King. Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,
  King. O for two speciall Reasons,
  King. Oh he is mad Laertes,
  King. Part them, they are incens'd
  King. She sounds to see them bleede
  King. Sweet Gertrude leaue vs too,
  King. The doores are broke
  King. There's matters in these sighes.
  King. Though yet of Hamlet our deere Brothers death
  King. Welcome deere Rosincrance and Guildensterne.
  King. Well, we shall sift him. Welcome good Frends:
  King. What Gertrude? How do's Hamlet?
  King. Where are my Switzers?
  Laer. A touch, a touch, I do confesse
  Laer. Do you see this, you Gods?
  Laer. Dread my Lord,
  Laer. For Hamlet, and the trifling of his fauours,
  Laer. He is iustly seru'd.
  Laer. How now? what noise is that?
  Laer. I'm lost in it my Lord; but let him come,
  Laer. If so you'l not o'rerule me to a peace
  Laer. Know you the hand?
  Laer. My Will, not all the world,
  Laer. My necessaries are imbark't; Farewell:
  Laer. To cut his throat i'th' Church
  Laer. Why as a Woodcocke
  Laer. Why aske you this?
  Mar. 'Tis gone, and will not answer
  Mar. Holla Barnardo
  Mar. Let do't I pray, and I this morning know
  Mar. Lord Hamlet
  Mar. My Lord vpon the platforme where we watcht
  Mar. Something is rotten in the State of Denmarke
  Mes. Letters my Lord from Hamlet, This to your
  Mes. Saue your selfe, my Lord.
  Mes. Saylors my Lord they say, I saw them not:
  Ophe. 'Tis briefe my Lord
  Ophe. Alas my Lord, I haue beene so affrighted
  Ophe. At home, my Lord
  Ophe. He hath my Lord of late, made many tenders
  Ophe. He tooke me by the wrist, and held me hard;
  Ophe. How should I your true loue know from another one?
  Ophe. I do not know, my Lord, what I should thinke
  Ophe. I hope all will be well. We must bee patient,
  Ophe. I my Lord
  Ophe. I my Lord
  Ophe. I thinke nothing, my Lord
  Ophe. My Lord
  Ophe. My Lord, I doe not know: but truly I do feare it
  Ophe. My Lord, as I was sowing in my Chamber,
  Ophe. No my Lord
  Ophe. No my good Lord: but as you did command,
  Ophe. O what a Noble minde is heere o're-throwne?
  Ophe. Say you? Nay pray you marke.
  Ophe. So please you, somthing touching the L[ord]. Hamlet
  Ophe. Well, God dil'd you. They say the Owle was
  Ophe. What is my Lord?
  Ophe. What meanes this, my Lord?
  Ophe. What meanes your Lordship?
  Ophe. Where is the beauteous Maiesty of Denmark
  Osr. How is't Laertes?
  Osr. I meane my Lord, the opposition of your person
  Osr. Nothing neither way
  Osr. Rapier and dagger
  Osr. The Carriages Sir, are the hangers
  Osr. The King Sir, hath laid that in a dozen passes betweene
  Osr. Yong Fortinbras, with conquest come fro[m] Poland
  Osr. Your Lordship is right welcome back to Denmarke
  Osricke. I my good Lord
  Other. Go too
  Other. I tell thee she is, and therefore make her Graue
  Other. The Gallowes maker; for that Frame outliues a
  Other. Why 'tis found so
  Play. I my Lord
  Play. I my Lord
  Pol. And the Queene too, and that presently
  Pol. Giue o're the Play
  Pol. He hath my Lord:
  Pol. He will come straight:
  Pol. I did enact Iulius Caesar, I was kill'd i'th' Capitol:
  Pol. I haue my Lord
  Pol. I heare him comming, let's withdraw my Lord.
  Pol. I meane the matter you meane, my Lord
  Pol. Indeed that is out o'th' Ayre:
  Pol. It shall do well. But yet do I beleeue
  Pol. My Lord, he's going to his Mothers Closset:
  Pol. Th' Ambassadors from Norwey, my good Lord,
  Pol. That's good: Inobled Queene is good
  Pol. The Actors are come hither my Lord
  Pol. This businesse is very well ended.
  Pol. Well be with you Gentlemen
  Pol. What a Treasure had he, my Lord?
  Pol. What do you thinke of me?
  Pol. You know sometimes
  Polon. Farewell:
  Polon. Giue him his money, and these notes Reynoldo
  Polon. If you call me Iephta my Lord, I haue a daughter
  Polon. My Lord; the Queene would speak with you,
  Polon. That I did my Lord, and was accounted a good
  Polon. The best Actors in the world, either for Tragedie,
  Polon. Verie like a Whale
  Polon. What ist Ophelia he hath said to you?
  Priest. Her Obsequies haue bin as farre inlarg'd.
  Priest. No more be done:
  Qu. Ah my good Lord, what haue I seene to night?
  Qu. Alacke I had forgot: 'Tis so concluded on
  Qu. Alacke, what noyse is this?
  Qu. Alas he's mad
  Qu. Alas, how is't with you?
  Qu. But looke where sadly the poore wretch
  Qu. For loue of God forbeare him
  Qu. Hamlet, thou hast thy Father much offended
  Qu. Haue you forgot me?
  Qu. I will not speake with her
  Qu. It may be very likely
  Qu. Mad as the Seas, and winde, when both contend
  Qu. Nay but Ophelia
  Qu. No, nothing but our selues
  Qu. Nothing at all, yet all that is I see
  Qu. Oh what a rash, and bloody deed is this?
  Qu. The Lady protests to much me thinkes
  Qu. This is the very coynage of your Braine,
  Qu. To draw apart the body he hath kild,
  Qu. What wilt thou do? thou wilt not murther me?
  Queen. Drown'd, drown'd
  Queen. One woe doth tread vpon anothers heele,
  Queen. There is a Willow growes aslant a Brooke,
  Queene. Amen.
  Queene. Sweets, to the sweet farewell.
  Reynol. At closes in the consequence:
  Reynol. I my Lord, I would know that
  Reynol. I, very well my Lord
  Reynol. My Lord I haue
  Ro. What haue you done my Lord with the dead body?
  Rosin. As the indifferent Children of the earth
  Rosin. Euen those you were wont to take delight in
  Rosin. God saue you Sir
  Rosin. Good my Lord.
  Rosin. I my Lord, they stay vpon your patience
  Rosin. I that they do my Lord. Hercules & his load too
  Rosin. Madam, it so fell out, that certaine Players
  Rosin. Most like a Gentleman
  Rosin. My Lord, you once did loue me
  Rosin. My most deare Lord?
  Rosin. Nay, their indeauour keepes in the wonted
  Rosin. Neither my Lord
  Rosin. No indeed, they are not
  Rosin. None my Lord; but that the World's growne
  Rosin. She desires to speake with you in her Closset,
  Rosin. To thinke, my Lord, if you delight not in Man,
  Rosin. To visit you my Lord, no other occasion
  Rosin. Where the dead body is bestow'd my Lord,
  Rosin. Without my Lord, guarded to know your
  Say. God blesse you Sir
  Ser. Saylors sir, they say they haue Letters for you
  Volt. Most faire returne of Greetings, and Desires.
'Gainst Fortunes State, would Treason haue pronounc'd?
'Tis dangerous, when the baser nature comes
'Tis heauie with him: and am I then reueng'd,
'Tis meete that some more audience then a Mother,
'Tis not alone my Inky Cloake (good Mother)
'Tis now the verie witching time of night,
'Tis strange
'Tis too much prou'd, that with Deuotions visage,
'Twere better not assaid; therefore this Proiect
'tis for the dead, not for the quicke, therefore thou
'twas so indeed
(And it doth well appeare vnto our State)
(And praise be rashnesse for it) let vs know,
(As I perchance heereafter shall thinke meet
(For so this side of our knowne world esteem'd him)
(For which, they say, you Spirits oft walke in death)
(Marcellus and Barnardo) on their Watch
(My feares forgetting manners) to vnseale
(O Heauen! A beast that wants discourse of Reason
(Thereto prick'd on by a most emulate Pride)
(Things standing thus vnknowne) shall liue behind me.
(Vnlesse things mortall moue them not at all)
(Which happily foreknowing may auoyd) Oh speake.
A Brothers murther. Pray can I not,
A Challice for the nonce; whereon but sipping,
A Combination, and a forme indeed,
A Couch for Luxury and damned Incest.
A Cutpurse of the Empire and the Rule.
A Heart vnfortified, a Minde impatient,
A Ministring Angell shall my Sister be,
A Noise within.
A Sable Siluer'd
A Scullion? Fye vpon't: Foh. About my Braine.
A Serpent stung me: so the whole eare of Denmarke,
A Sister driuen into desperate tearmes,
A Slaue, that is not twentieth part the tythe
A Station, like the Herald Mercurie
A Sword vnbaited, and in a passe of practice,
A Villaine killes my Father, and for that
A Violet in the youth of Primy Nature;
A basenesse to write faire; and laboured much
A blanket in th' Alarum of feare caught vp.
A broken voyce, and his whole Function suiting
A damn'd defeate was made. Am I a Coward?
A double blessing is a double grace;
A dull and muddy-metled Rascall, peake
A face without a heart?
A fault against the Dead, a fault to Nature,
A happinesse,
A little Month, or ere those shooes were old,
A man that Fortunes buffets, and Rewards
A noise within. Let her come in.
A rapsidie of words. Heauens face doth glow,
A rowsed Vengeance sets him new a-worke,
A sauagenes in vnreclaim'd bloud of generall assault
A second time, I kill my Husband dead,
A silence in the Heauens, the Racke stand still,
A verie verie Paiocke
A worthy Pioner, once more remoue good friends
About her lanke and all ore-teamed Loines,
About the World haue times twelue thirties beene,
Abridgements come.
Absent thee from felicitie awhile,
Abuses me to damne me. Ile haue grounds
According to the Phrase and the Addition,
Act to doe and to performe; argall she drown'd her selfe
Action. The
Actor
Acts little of his will. Tell me Laertes,
Actus Primus. Scoena Prima.
Actus Secundus.
Adams Profession
Addicted so and so; and there put on him
Admit no Messengers, receiue no Tokens:
Adue, adue, Hamlet: remember me.
Affront Ophelia. Her Father, and my selfe (lawful espials)
After the Danish Sword, and thy free awe
After the thing it loues
Against the which, a Moity competent
Against thy Mother ought; leaue her to heauen,
Against your selfe. I know you are no Truant:
Alacke, and fie for shame:
Alas, how shall this bloody deede be answered?
Alexander died: Alexander was buried: Alexander returneth
All Flaxen was his Pole:
All from her Fathers death. Oh Gertrude, Gertrude,
All giuen to mine eare
All may be well.
All my smooth Body.
All sawes of Bookes, all formes, all presures past,
Almost to Ielly with the Act of feare,
Ambitious, with more offences at my becke,
Among a Minerall of Mettels base
An Vnderstanding simple, and vnschool'd:
An eye like Mars, to threaten or command
An houre of quiet shortly shall we see;
And (as I thinke) they haue already order
And (my yong Mistris) thus I did bespeake
And Conuoy is assistant; doe not sleepe,
And England, if my loue thou holdst at ought,
And Forraigne Mart for Implements of warre:
And I a Maid at your Window, to be your Valentine.
And I am sicke at heart
And I belieue it is a fetch of warrant:
And I beseech you instantly to visit
And I do doubt the hatch, and the disclose
And I do thinke, or else this braine of mine
And I the matter will re-word: which madnesse
And I with them the third Night kept the Watch,
And Iemme of all our Nation
And Ile be plac'd so, please you in the eare
And Mermaid-like, a while they bore her vp,
And Sister, as the Winds giue Benefit,
And a most instant Tetter bak'd about,
And after we will both our iudgements ioyne,
And all we waile for
And am most sensible in greefe for it,
And as he dreines his draughts of Renish downe,
And as my Loue is siz'd, my Feare is so
And as the sleeping Soldiours in th' Alarme,
And as the world were now but to begin,
And as you said, and wisely was it said,
And at our more consider'd time wee'l read,
And at the sound it shrunke in hast away,
And batten on this Moore? Ha? Haue you eyes?
And be not from his reason falne thereon;
And beare it to the Chappell
And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,
And borrowing duls the edge of Husbandry.
And botch the words vp fit to their owne thoughts,
And both neglect; what if this cursed hand
And boule the round Naue downe the hill of Heauen,
And bow them to your gracious leaue and pardon
And breake your owne necke downe
And breath of life: I haue no life to breath
And bring the Gentlemen where Hamlet is
And but that great Command, o're-swaies the order,
And by opposing end them: to dye, to sleepe
And call it accident: Some two Monthes hence
And call the Noblest to the Audience.
And can say nothing: No, not for a King,
And carriage of the Article designe,
And cleaue the generall eare with horrid speech:
And could of men distinguish, her election
And crooke the pregnant Hindges of the knee,
And curd, like Aygre droppings into Milke,
And do not spred the Compost on the Weedes,
And do such bitter businesse as the day
And do't the speedier, that you may direct me
And draw you into madnesse thinke of it?
And duller should'st thou be then the fat weede
And each particular haire to stand an end,
And end his being. That done, he lets me goe,
And enterprizes of great pith and moment,
And fall a Cursing like a very Drab.
And flights of Angels sing thee to thy rest,
And for his death no winde of blame shall breath,
And for his passage,
And for my Soule, what can it doe to that?
And for my meanes, Ile husband them so well,
And for that purpose Ile annoint my Sword:
And for the day confin'd to fast in Fiers,
And for your Rapier most especiall,
And for your part Ophelia, I do wish
And from her faire and vnpolluted flesh,
And from his Mother Clossets hath he drag'd him.
And from his mouth
And gather by him, as he is behaued,
And gaue you such a Masterly report,
And gins to pale his vneffectuall Fire:
And hath shipped me intill the Land,
And he beseech'd me to intreate your Maiesties
And he repulsed. A short Tale to make,
And he to England shall along with you:
And here giue vp our selues, in the full bent,
And his Commission to imploy those Soldiers
And hitherto doth Loue on Fortune tend,
And how his Audit stands, who knowes, saue Heauen:
And how, and who; what meanes; and where they keepe:
And hurt my Mother
And if thou prate of Mountaines; let them throw
And in his brainish apprehension killes
And in part him. Doe you marke this Reynoldo?
And in the Cup an vnion shal he throw
And in the Morne and liquid dew of Youth,
And in the Porches of mine eares did poure
And in this harsh world draw thy breath in paine,
And in this vpshot, purposes mistooke,
And it must follow, as the Night the Day,
And keepe a Farme and Carters
And keepe within the reare of your Affection;
And lay your hands againe vpon my sword,
And leads the will to desperate Vndertakings,
And let him for a paire of reechie kisses,
And let him know so
And let me speake to th' yet vnknowing world,
And let me wring your heart, for so I shall
And let the Kettle to the Trumpets speake,
And let thine eye looke like a Friend on Denmarke.
And let vs heare Barnardo speake of this
And let vs once againe assaile your eares,
And like a Newtrall to his will and matter, did nothing.
And like a man to double businesse bound,
And like the kinde Life-rend'ring Politician,
And liue the purer with the other halfe.
And loose the name of Action. Soft you now,
And loose your voyce. What would'st thou beg Laertes,
And makes a blister there. Makes marriage vowes
And makes as healthfull Musicke. It is not madnesse
And makes each petty Artire in this body,
And makes vs rather beare those illes we haue,
And many such like Assis of great charge,
And meant to wracke thee: but beshrew my iealousie:
And melt in her owne fire. Proclaime no shame,
And more aboue hath his soliciting,
And much offence too, touching this Vision heere:
And my Imaginations are as foule
And neuer come mischance betweene vs twaine.
And neuer did the Cyclops hammers fall
And not t'haue strew'd thy Graue
And not where I had arm'd them
And now Ile doo't, and so he goes to Heauen,
And now Laertes, what's the newes with you?
And now no soyle nor cautell doth besmerch
And now reignes heere.
And of all Christian Soules, I pray God.
And oft 'tis seene, the wicked prize it selfe
And on his graue raines many a teare,
And our affaires from England come too late,
And our vaine blowes, malicious Mockery
And passion in the Gods
And peculiar life is bound
And pious Action, we do surge o're
And pittie it is true: A foolish figure,
And put it in his Pocket
And reaks not his owne reade
And scape detecting, I will pay the Theft.
And set a double varnish on the fame
And shall I couple Hell? Oh fie: hold my heart;
And since so Neighbour'd to his youth, and humour,
And so am I reueng'd: that would be scann'd,
And so, without more circumstance at all,
And sodainely contriue the meanes of meeting
And stand a Comma 'tweene their amities,
And still your fingers on your lippes I pray,
And sure I am, two men there are not liuing,
And tediousnesse, the limbes and outward flourishes,
And tell you what I know
And termes Compulsatiue, those foresaid Lands
And that I hope will teach you to imagine-
And that I see in passages of proofe,
And that he cals for drinke; Ile haue prepar'd him
And that his Soule may be as damn'd and blacke
And that in way of caution: I must tell you,
And that our drift looke through our bad performance,
And that shall lend a kinde of easinesse
And that your Grace hath screen'd, and stoode betweene
And the Kings Rouce, the Heauens shall bruite againe,
And then (they say) no Spirit can walke abroad,
And there I see such blacke and grained spots,
And there assumes some other horrible forme,
And there did seeme in him a kinde of ioy
And therefore I forbid my teares: but yet
And therefore must his choyce be circumscrib'd
And these few Precepts in thy memory,
And they in France of the best ranck and station,
And they ran well on Horsebacke; but this Gallant
And they shall heare and iudge 'twixt you and me;
And thinke it pastime. You shortly shall heare more,
And thirtie dozen Moones with borrowed sheene,
And thou hadst not come to my bed
And thou must cure me: Till I know 'tis done,
And thou shalt liue in this faire world behinde,
And thrice his head thus wauing vp and downe;
And thus I know his father and his friends,
And thus awhile the fit will worke on him:
And thus doe we of wisedome and of reach
And thus o're-sized with coagulate gore,
And thus the Natiue hew of Resolution
And thy Commandment all alone shall liue
And thy best graces spend it at thy will:
And to my mind, though I am natiue heere,
And to such wondrous doing brought his Horse,
And to the last, bended their light on me
And to the manner borne: It is a Custome
And to those Thornes that in her bosome lodge,
And vanisht from our sight
And wager on your heads, he being remisse,
And waites vpon the Iudgement: and what Iudgement
And wants not Buzzers to infect his eare
And we beseech you, bend you to remaine
And we did thinke it writ downe in our duty
And we shall ioyntly labour with your soule
And what make you from Wittenberg Horatio?
And what so poore a man as Hamlet is,
And what's in Prayer, but this two-fold force,
And what's vntimely done. Oh come away,
And whatsoeuer els shall hap to night,
And when he's not himselfe, do's wrong Laertes,
And when you are desirous to be blest,
And where 'tis so, th' Offenders scourge is weigh'd
And where th' offence is, let the great Axe fall.
And who in want a hollow Friend doth try,
And why such dayly Cast of Brazon Cannon
And wil not wrong it
And will he not come againe:
And will not let beleefe take hold of him
And will this Brothers wager frankely play.
And with a larger tether may he walke,
And with a looke so pitious in purport,
And with a sodaine vigour it doth posset
And with his head ouer his shoulders turn'd,
And with his other hand thus o're his brow,
And with no lesse Nobility of Loue,
And with such coozenage; is't not perfect conscience,
And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken,
And with their corporall ayre do hold discourse.
And with them words of so sweet breath compos'd,
And yet to me they are strong. The Queen his Mother,
And you are staid for there: my blessing with you;
And you must needs haue heard how I am punisht
And you must put me in your heart for Friend,
And you my sinnewes, grow not instant Old;
And you the Iudges beare a wary eye
And you your selfe shall keepe the key of it
And your poore Seruant euer
Anon as patient as the female Doue,
Answer, and thinke vpon this Businesse.
Answere
Antiquity forgot, Custome not knowne,
Appeares before them, and with sollemne march
Are base respects of Thrift, but none of Loue.
Are burnt and purg'd away? But that I am forbid
Are heere arriued. Giue order that these bodies
Are ioyfully return'd
Are mortiz'd and adioyn'd: which when it falles,
Are of a most select and generous cheff in that.
Arm'd at all points exactly, Cap a Pe,
Art more ingag'd: Helpe Angels, make assay:
As 'twere a thing a little soil'd i'th' working:
As England was his faithfull Tributary,
As Hell, whereto it goes. My Mother stayes,
As I do thee. Something too much of this.
As I haue vs'd to do: that I haue found
As I perceiued it, I must tell you that
As Peace should still her wheaten Garland weare,
As Reason panders Will
As Vulcans Stythe. Giue him needfull note,
As any the most vulgar thing to sence,
As are Companions noted and most knowne
As by your Safety, Wisedome, all things else,
As checking at his Voyage, and that he meanes
As day do's to your eye.
As deepe as to the Lungs? Who does me this?
As ere my Conuersation coap'd withall
As false as Dicers Oathes. Oh such a deed,
As fits a Kings remembrance
As from the body of Contraction pluckes
As had he beene encorps't and demy-Natur'd
As hardy as the Nemian Lions nerue:
As he in his peculiar Sect and force
As he is very potent with such Spirits,
As he would draw it. Long staid he so,
As hush as death: Anon the dreadfull Thunder
As if encrease of Appetite had growne
As if he had been loosed out of hell,
As if it some impartment did desire
As it behoues my Daughter, and your Honour.
As it is common for the yonger sort
As kill a King, and marrie with his Brother
As loue betweene them, as the Palme should flourish,
As low as to the Fiends
As made the things more rich, then perfume left:
As make your bowts more violent to the end,
As may dishonour him; take heed of that:
As meditation, or the thoughts of Loue,
As my great power thereof may giue thee sense,
As needfull in our Loues, fitting our Duty?
As of a Father; For let the world take note,
As oft as any passion vnder Heauen,
As one in suffering all, that suffers nothing.
As one incapable of her owne distresse,
As therein are set downe
As they fell out by Time, by Meanes, and Place,
As to expend your time with vs a-while,
As to giue words or talke with the Lord Hamlet:
As to peace-parted Soules
As watchmen to my heart: but good my Brother
As we haue warrantie, her death was doubtfull,
As well, we know, or we could and if we would,
As will not leaue their Tinct
As you are Friends, Schollers and Soldiers,
Assume a Vertue, if you haue it not, refraine to night,
At friend, or so, and Gentleman
At gaming, swearing, or about some acte
At his head a grasse-greene Turfe, at his heeles a stone.
At last, a little shaking of mine Arme:
At least I'm sure it may be so in Denmarke;
At least the whisper goes so: Our last King,
Attendants.
Attends the boystrous Ruine. Neuer alone
Author of affectation, but cal'd it an honest method. One
Awake the God of Day: and at his warning,
Away, for euery thing is Seal'd and done
Bak'd and impasted with the parching streets,
Be all my sinnes remembred
Be as our selfe in Denmarke. Madam come,
Be buried quicke with her, and so will I.
Be soft as sinewes of the new-borne Babe,
Be somewhat scanter of your Maiden presence;
Be thou a Spirit of health, or Goblin damn'd,
Be thou familiar; but by no meanes vulgar:
Be thy euents wicked or charitable,
Be wary then, best safety lies in feare;
Be you and I behinde an Arras then,
Be you content to lend your patience to vs,
Bear't that th' opposed may beware of thee.
Beare Hamlet like a Soldier to the Stage,
Beares such an Emphasis? whose phrase of Sorrow
Becomes the Field, but heere shewes much amis.
Beene thus encountred. A figure like your Father,
Before mine Vnkle. Ile obserue his lookes,
Before my Daughter told me what might you
Before you visite him you make inquiry
Begin Murderer. Pox, leaue thy damnable Faces, and
Behinde the Arras Ile conuey my selfe
Behinde the Arras, hearing something stirre,
Being a thing immortall as it selfe:
Beleeue so much in him, that he is young,
Bene strooke so to the soule, that presently
Betweene him, and my daughter.
Betweene the passe, and fell incensed points
Blacke as his purpose, did the night resemble
Blasted with extasie. Oh woe is me,
Blasting his wholsom breath. Haue you eyes?
Bodie of the Time, his forme and pressure. Now, this
Both countenance, and excuse.
Both heere, and hence, pursue me lasting strife,
Both to my God, one to my gracious King:
Bow stubborne knees, and heart with strings of Steele,
Braines
Breake all the Spokes and Fallies from her wheele,
Breake we our Watch vp, and by my aduice
Breathing like sanctified and pious bonds,
Briefe let me be: Sleeping within mine Orchard,
Bring with thee ayres from Heauen, or blasts from Hell,
Brutus kill'd me
Burne out the Sence and Vertue of mine eye.
But I am Pigeon-Liuer'd, and lacke Gall
But I do prophesie th' election lights
But I haue that Within, which passeth show;
But Sir, such wanton, wild, and vsuall slips,
But answere made it none: yet once me thought
But as we often see against some storme,
But beare me stiffely vp: Remember thee?
But better look'd into, he truly found
But breake my heart, for I must hold my tongue.
But byrlady he must builde Churches then: or else shall
But die thy thoughts, when thy first Lord is dead
But doe not dull thy palme, with entertainment
But doe not goe with it
But euen his Mother shall vncharge the practice,
But euen then, the Morning Cocke crew lowd;
But fall vnshaken, when they mellow bee.
But farewell it: for I will vse no Art.
But from what cause he will by no meanes speake
But hee's an arrant knaue
But howsoeuer thou pursuest this Act,
But if the Gods themselues did see her then,
But if you hold it fit after the Play,
But if't be hee I meane, hees very wilde;
But in Battalians. First, her Father slaine,
But in a Fixion, in a dreame of Passion,
But in our circumstance and course of thought
But in the grosse and scope of my Opinion,
But let it be: Horatio, I am dead,
But let me heare from you
But let that go
But let this same be presently perform'd,
But like the Owner of a foule disease,
But looke, Amazement on thy Mother sits;
But looke, the Morne in Russet mantle clad,
But made in craft. 'Twere good you let him know,
But meere implorators of vnholy Sutes,
But neerer the offence: to beare all smooth, and euen,
But neuer Doubt, I loue.
But not exprest in fancie; rich, not gawdie:
But now my Cosin Hamlet, and my Sonne?
But orderly to end, where I begun,
But our cold Maids doe Dead Mens Fingers call them:
But pardon't as you are a Gentleman.
But since he is better'd, we haue therefore oddes
But since so iumpe vpon this bloodie question,
But sir, such answers as I can make, you shal command:
But soft, behold: Loe, where it comes againe:
But soft, but soft, aside; heere comes the King.
But soft, me thinkes I sent the Mornings Ayre;
But sure the brauery of his griefe did put me
But that I know Loue is begun by Time:
But that the dread of something after death,
But that this folly doubts it.
But the great Cannon to the Clowds shall tell,
But this eternall blason must not be
But this most foule, strange, and vnnaturall
But to confront the visage of Offence?
But to recouer of vs by strong hand
But two months dead: Nay, not so much; not two,
But we will ship him hence, and this vilde deed,
But what in faith make you from Wittemberge?
But what is your affaire in Elsenour?
But what we do determine, oft we breake:
But wilt thou heare me how I did proceed?
But with a crafty Madnesse keepes aloofe:
But with the whiffe and winde of his fell Sword,
But woe is me, you are so sicke of late,
But would you were not so. You are my Mother
But you must know, your Father lost a Father,
But you'l be secret?
Buyes out the Law; but 'tis not so aboue,
By Cocke they are too blame.
By Heau'n, Ile make a Ghost of him that lets me:
By Heauen, thy madnesse shall be payed by waight,
By Letters coniuring to that effect
By and by
By desperate appliance are releeued,
By gis, and by S[aint]. Charity,
By his Cockle hat and staffe, and his Sandal shoone
By indirections finde directions out:
By their opprest and feare-surprized eyes,
By this encompassement and drift of question,
By what is fed on; and yet within a month?
Byrlady your Ladiship is neerer Heauen then when
Calfe there. Be the Players ready?
Cals Vertue Hypocrite, takes off the Rose
Can serue my turne? Forgiue me my foule Murther:
Cap, we are not the very Button
Caps, hands, and tongues, applaud it to the clouds,
Carue for himselfe; for, on his choyce depends
Chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch thicke, to this
Chaplesse, and knockt about the Mazard with a Sextons
Claimes the conueyance of a promis'd March
Clambring to hang; an enuious sliuer broke,
Coach: Goodnight Ladies: Goodnight sweet Ladies:
Colleagued with the dreame of his Aduantage;
Collected from all Simples that haue Vertue
Come Gertrude, wee'l call vp our wisest friends,
Come hither Gentlemen,
Come one you here this fellow in the selleredge
Come short of what he did
Come sir, to draw toward an end with you.
Come some Musicke
Come, I will giue you way for these your Letters,
Come, my Spade; there is no ancient Gentlemen,
Come: Another hit; what say you?
Comedie, Historie, Pastorall:
Comes reading
Complexion
Conceit in weakest bodies, strongest workes.
Confederate season, else, no Creature seeing:
Confound the ignorant, and amaze indeed,
Coniure the wandring Starres, and makes them stand
Conscience and Grace, to the profoundest Pit.
Consent to sweare
Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot blood,
Contagious blastments are most imminent.
Conuert his Gyues to Graces. So that my Arrowes
Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy;
Couch we a while, and mark
Could force his soule so to his whole conceit,
Could not (with all there quantitie of Loue)
Could you on this faire Mountaine leaue to feed,
Cousen Hamlet, you know the wager
Cries Cuckold to my Father, brands the Harlot
Crowne, kisses it, and powres poyson in the Kings eares, and
Cry to be heard, as 'twere from Heauen to Earth,
Cut off euen in the Blossomes of my Sinne,
Damned Dane,
Dar'd to the Combate. In which, our Valiant Hamlet,
Deere Maid, kinde Sister, sweet Ophelia:
Delay it not, Ile haue him hence to night.
Deliberate pause, diseases desperate growne,
Denmarke, and those that would make mowes at him
Depriu'd thee of. Hold off the earth a while,
Deuis'd a new Commission, wrote it faire,
Deuoutly to be wish'd. To dye to sleepe,
Did Hamlet so envenom with his Enuy,
Did coldly furnish forth the Marriage Tables;
Did forfeite (with his life) all those his Lands
Did slay this Fortinbras: who by a Seal'd Compact,
Did sometimes march: By Heauen I charge thee speake
Did the King sighe, but with a generall grone
Dies not alone; but like a Gulfe doth draw
Directly seasons him his Enemie.
Discomfort you (my Lord) it nothing must:
Discretion be your Tutor. Sute the Action to the Word,
Diuided from her selfe, and her faire Iudgement,
Do I impart towards you. For your intent
Do not for euer with thy veyled lids
Do not it selfe vnkennell in one speech,
Do ye heare, let them be well vs'd: for they are
Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it,
Do's not diuide the Sunday from the weeke,
Doe not as some vngracious Pastors doe,
Doe not beleeue his vowes; for they are Broakers,
Doe you beleeue his tenders, as you call them?
Doom'd for a certaine terme to walke the night;
Dost thou heare me old Friend, can you play the
Doth by their owne insinuation grow:
Doth make the Night ioynt-Labourer with the day:
Doth rend the Region. So after Pyrrhus pause,
Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding Throate
Doubt Truth to be a Lier,
Doubt thou, the Starres are fire,
Doubt, that the Sunne doth moue:
Drinke off this Potion: Is thy Vnion heere?
Drugges fit, and Time agreeing:
Ducates a peece, for his picture in Little. There is something
Dyes
Dyes.
Each opposite that blankes the face of ioy,
Each small annexment, pettie consequence
Each toy seemes Prologue, to some great amisse,
Eates not the Flats with more impittious haste
England. Farewell deere Mother
Enquire me first what Danskers are in Paris;
Enter Barnardo and Francisco two Centinels.
Enter Claudius King of Denmarke, Gertrude the Queene, Hamlet,
Enter Fortinbras and English Ambassador, with Drumme, Colours,
Enter Fortinbras with an Armie.
Enter Ghost againe.
Enter Ghost and Hamlet.
Enter Ghost.
Enter Ghost.
Enter Hamlet and Guildensterne.
Enter Hamlet and Horatio
Enter Hamlet and Horatio a farre off.
Enter Hamlet reading on a Booke.
Enter Hamlet, Horatio, Marcellus.
Enter Hamlet, and two or three of the Players.
Enter Hamlet.
Enter Hamlet.
Enter Hamlet.
Enter Hamlet.
Enter Horatio and Marcellus.
Enter Horatio and Marcellus.
Enter Horatio, Barnardo, and Marcellus.
Enter Horatio, with an Attendant.
Enter Horatio.
Enter King and Laertes.
Enter King and his Queene.
Enter King, Queene, Laertes and Lords, with other Attendants with
Enter King, Queene, Laertes, and a Coffin, with Lords attendant.
Enter King, Queene, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosincrance,
Enter King, Queene, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosincrance,
Enter King, Queene, Rosincrane, and Guildensterne Cum alijs.
Enter King, Rosincrance, and Guildensterne.
Enter King, and Polonius.
Enter King.
Enter King.
Enter King.
Enter Laertes and Ophelia.
Enter Lucianus.
Enter Ophelia distracted.
Enter Ophelia.
Enter Ophelia.
Enter Osricke.
Enter Polonius, Rosincrance, and Guildensterne.
Enter Polonius, Voltumand, and Cornelius.
Enter Polonius, and Reynoldo.
Enter Polonius.
Enter Polonius.
Enter Polonius.
Enter Polonius.
Enter Polonius.
Enter Prologue.
Enter Queene and Horatio.
Enter Queene and Polonius.
Enter Queene.
Enter Ros. & Guild.
Enter Ros. and Guildensterne.
Enter Rosincran and Guildensterne.
Enter Rosincrance and Guildensterne.
Enter Rosincrane.
Enter Saylor.
Enter Voltemand and Cornelius.
Enter a King and Queene, very louingly; the Queene embracing
Enter a Messenger.
Enter a Messenger.
Enter foure or fiue Players.
Enter one with a Recorder.
Enter the Ghost.
Enter two Clownes.
Enter young Osricke.
Enter.
Enter.
Enter.
Enter.
Enter.
Enter.
Enter.
Enter.
Enter.
Enter.
Enter.
Enter.
Enter.
Epitaph is, For o, For o, the Hoby-horse is forgot.
Ere I could make a Prologue to my braines,
Ere I had euer seene that day Horatio.
Ere yet the salt of most vnrighteous Teares
Euen heere betweene the chaste vnsmirched brow
Euen in their promise, as it is a making;
Euen on the pith of life. Where is he gone?
Euen to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
Euen whiles mens mindes are wilde,
Euen with the verie Comment of my Soule
Exchange forgiuenesse with me, Noble Hamlet;
Exeunt
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt. Gent.
Exeunt. Ghost & Hamlet.
Exeunt. Marching: after the which, a Peale of Ordenance are shot
Exeunt. Ophelia
Exit
Exit
Exit
Exit
Exit Ambass.
Exit Fran.
Exit Gent.
Exit Ghost.
Exit Hamlet tugging in Polonius.
Exit Hamlet.
Exit King & Queen.
Exit Laer.
Exit Messenger
Exit Players.
Exit Polon.
Exit Polonius.
Exit Voltemand and Cornelius.
Exit the Ghost.
Exits. The
Extorted Treasure in the wombe of Earth,
Eyes. When I shall (first asking your Pardon thereunto) recount
FINIS. The tragedie of HAMLET, Prince of Denmarke.
Fall ten times trebble, on that cursed head
Falne on the Inuentors head. All this can I
Fare you well my Doue
Farewell, and let your hast commend your duty
Farewell: my Blessing season this in thee
Feare it Ophelia, feare it my deare Sister,
Feature, Scorne her owne Image, and the verie Age and
Fell in the weeping Brooke, her cloathes spred wide,
Fell into a Sadnesse, then into a Fast,
Fellowes as I do, crawling betweene Heauen and Earth.
Fellowes some meanes to the King: They haue Letters
Fie on't? Oh fie, fie, 'tis an vnweeded Garden
Finger'd their Packet, and in fine, withdrew
Fixt on the Somnet of the highest Mount.
Flaggon of Renish on my head once. This same Scull
Flourish for the Players.
Folded the Writ vp in forme of the other,
Follow my Mother.
For 'tis a question left vs yet to proue,
For Art and exercise in your defence;
For England
For Foode and Diet, to some Enterprize
For Hecuba?
For Husband shalt thou-
For I mine eyes will riuet to his Face:
For Murther, though it haue no tongue, will speake
For bearing of this greeting to old Norway,
For bonny sweet Robin is all my ioy
For by the image of my Cause, I see
For euery man ha's businesse and desire,
For good Polonius death; and we haue done but greenly
For he was likely, had he beene put on
For hee himselfe is subiect to his Birth:
For her perfections. But my reuenge will come
For if the King like not the Comedie,
For in that sleepe of death, what dreames may come,
For in the fatnesse of this pursie times,
For it is as the Ayre, invulnerable,
For like the Hecticke in my blood he rages,
For lone oft loses both it selfe and friend:
For me, with sorrow, I embrace my Fortune,
For nature cressant does not grow alone,
For out adores he went without their helpe;
For she may strew dangerous coniectures
For some must watch, while some must sleepe;
For that which thou hast done, must send thee hence
For the Apparell oft proclaimes the man.
For the demand of our neglected Tribute:
For the supply and profit of our Hope,
For they are actions that a man might play:
For this effect defectiue, comes by cause,
For thou dost know: Oh Damon deere,
For vs, and for our Tragedie,
For we haue closely sent for Hamlet hither,
For we will Fetters put vpon this feare,
For what aduancement may I hope from thee,
For who not needs, shall neuer lacke a Frend:
For who that's but a Queene, faire, sober, wise,
For who would beare the Whips and Scornes of time,
For womens Feare and Loue, holds quantitie,
For your desire to know what is betweene vs,
For, what we know must be, and is as common
Fore do it owne life; 'twas some Estate.
Forme of the thing; each word made true and good,
Forth at your eyes, your spirits wildely peepe,
Foyles,
Free me so farre in your most generous thoughts,
Friends both go ioyne you with some further ayde:
From fashion of himselfe. What thinke you on't?
From me, whose loue was of that dignity,
From the faire forehead of an innocent loue,
From the first Coarse, till he that dyed to day,
From whence, though willingly I came to Denmarke
Froward, not permanent; sweet not lasting
Generall: but it was (as I receiu'd it, and others, whose
Get from him why he puts on this Confusion:
Get you a place
Ghost beckens Hamlet.
Ghost cries vnder the Stage.
Gifts, she seemes loath and vnwilling awhile, but in the end,
Giue euery man thine eare; but few thy voyce:
Giue her good watch I pray you:
Giue him a further edge, and driue his purpose on
Giue it an vnderstanding but no tongue;
Giue me one poore request
Giue me the Cups,
Giue vs the Foyles: Come on
Giuen priuate time to you; and you your selfe
Giues him three thousand Crownes in Annuall Fee,
Giues me superfluous death.
Giues the tongue vowes: these blazes, Daughter,
Giuing more light then heate; extinct in both,
Giuing to you no further personall power
Go seeke him out, speake faire, and bring the body
Go some of ye,
Go to your rest, at night wee'l Feast together.
Go too, Ile no more on't, it hath made me mad.
Go, Farewell. Or if thou wilt needs Marry, marry a fool:
Go, bid the Souldiers shoote.
God buy ye.
God has giuen you one pace, and you make your selfe another:
God willing shall not lacke: let vs goe in together,
Gods creatures, and make your Wantonnesse, your Ignorance.
Goes slow and stately: By them thrice he walkt,
Good Gertrude set some watch ouer your Sonne,
Good night Mother.
Good night, but go not to mine Vnkles bed,
Good sir, or so, or friend, or Gentleman.
Goodnight sweet Prince,
Goodnight, goodnight.
Goose-quils, and dare scarse come thither
Gramercy on his Soule.
Grapple them to thy Soule, with hoopes of Steele:
Grating so harshly all his dayes of quiet
Graue, to tell vs this
Greefe ioyes, Ioy greeues on slender accident.
Grop'd I to finde out them; had my desire,
Groundlings: who (for the most part) are capeable of
Growes wide withall. Perhaps he loues you now,
Guildenstern, and
Guildensterne, and
Guildensterne? Oh, Rosincrane; good Lads: How doe ye
Gumme: and that they haue a plentifull locke of Wit,
Ha? Why I should take it: for it cannot be,
Had I but time (as this fell Sergeant death
Had he bin Vanquisher, as by the same Cou'nant
Had he the Motiue and the Cue for passion
Had it th' abilitie of life to thanke you:
Had left the flushing of her gauled eyes,
Had made his course t' illume that part of Heauen
Had witchcraft in't; he grew into his Seat,
Hamlet comes backe: what would you vndertake,
Hamlet in madnesse hath Polonius slaine,
Hamlet is of the Faction that is wrong'd,
Hamlet return'd, shall know you are come home:
Hamlet the Dane
Hamlet, this Pearle is thine,
Hamlet, thou art slaine,
Hamlet.
Hamlet.
Hangers or so: three of the Carriages infaith are very
Haply the Seas and Countries different
Hath 'tane with equall Thankes. And blest are those,
Hath giuen me this: now gather, and surmise.
Hath in the skirts of Norway, heere and there,
Hath now this dread and blacke Complexion smear'd
Hath op'd his ponderous and Marble iawes,
Hath seal'd thee for her selfe. For thou hast bene
Hath turn'd it selfe on me. Loe, heere I lye,
Haue I of Ladies most deiect and wretched,
Haue burst their cerments, why the Sepulcher
Haue by the very cunning of the Scoene,
Haue of your audience beene most free and bounteous.
Haue we, as 'twere, with a defeated ioy,
Haue you a daughter?
Haue you any further Trade with vs?
Haue you so slander any moment leisure,
Hauing euer seene. In the prenominate crimes,
Hazard so dangerous as doth hourely grow
He closes with you in this consequence:
He closes with you thus. I know the Gentleman,
He does: what was I about to say?
He fals to such perusall of my face,
He hath not fayl'd to pester vs with Message,
He hath one twelue for mine, and that would come to
He is dead and gone Lady, he is dead and gone,
He is gone, he is gone, and we cast away mone,
He may approue our eyes, and speake to it
He neuer gaue command'ment for their death.
He neuer wil come againe.
He rais'd a sigh, so pittious and profound,
He seem'd to finde his way without his eyes,
He should the bearers put to sodaine death,
He smot the sledded Pollax on the Ice.
He tels me my sweet Queene, that he hath found
He that hath kil'd my King, and whor'd my Mother,
He that thou knowest thine,
He tooke my Father grossely, full of bread,
He walkes foure houres together, heere
He whips his Rapier out, and cries a Rat, a Rat,
Hee may not, as vnuallued persons doe,
Hee's loued of the distracted multitude,
Heere in the cheere and comfort of our eye,
Heere is your Husband, like a Mildew'd eare
Heere stooping to your Clemencie:
Heere's a Napkin, rub thy browes,
Heere's yet some Liquor left
Helpe, helpe, hoa
Her Brother is in secret come from France,
Her Maiden strewments, and the bringing home
Herbe-Grace a Sundaies: Oh you must weare your Rew
Here as before, neuer so helpe you mercy,
Here was a Gentleman of Normandy,
Here's to thy health. Giue him the cup,
Hey non nony, nony, hey nony:
High and Mighty, you shall know I am set naked on your
High on a stage be placed to the view,
Himselfe, the Primrose path of dalliance treads,
Hiperion to a Satyre: so louing to my Mother,
His Beard as white as Snow,
His Cannon 'gainst Selfe-slaughter. O God, O God!
His Fathers death, and our o're-hasty Marriage.
His Liberty is full of threats to all,
His Nephewes Leuies, which to him appear'd
His accesse to me
His fell to Hamlet. Now sir, young Fortinbras,
His forme and cause conioyn'd, preaching to stones,
His further gate heerein. In that the Leuies,
His greatnesse weigh'd, his will is not his owne;
His madnesse is poore Hamlets Enemy.
His meanes of death, his obscure buriall;
His silence will sit drooping
Ho Guildenstern:
Hoboyes play. The dumbe shew enters.
Hold it a fashion and a toy in Bloude;
Hold you the watch to Night?
Holding a weake supposall of our worth;
Holds such an enmity with bloud of Man,
Honour'd, belou'd, and haply, one as kinde.
Horatio tell me one thing
Horatio, When thou shalt haue ouerlook'd this, giue these
Horatio, or I do forget my selfe
Houres
Houses that he makes, lasts till Doomesday: go, get thee
How are they escorted? Will they pursue the Quality no
How dangerous is it that this man goes loose:
How does your Honor for this many a day?
How ere my happes, my ioyes were ne're begun.
How in my words someuer she be shent,
How much I had to doe to calme his rage?
How now Ophelia, what's the matter?
How now my Lord,
How now? What Newes?
How now? What hath befalne?
How otherwise will you be rul'd by me?
How pregnant (sometimes) his Replies are?
How smart a lash that speech doth giue my Conscience?
How strange or odde so ere I beare my selfe;
How these things came about. So shall you heare
How to forget that learning: but Sir now,
How weary, stale, flat, and vnprofitable
Hunts not the traile of Policie, so sure
Hurts the King.
Hyperions curles, the front of Ioue himselfe,
I alone became their Prisoner. They haue dealt with mee, like
I am affear'd you make a wanton of me
I am dead Horatio, wretched Queene adiew,
I am iustly kill'd with mine owne Treacherie
I am more an Antike Roman then a Dane:
I am poyson'd
I am sorrie that with better speed and iudgement
I bought an Vnction of a Mountebanke
I can no more, the King, the King's too blame
I cannot deeme of. I intreat you both,
I cannot liue to heare the Newes from England,
I cannot tell how: but my Lord, his Maiesty bad me signifie
I could a Tale vnfold, whose lightest word
I could not but by her. The other Motiue,
I dare Damnation: to this point I stand,
I did repell his Letters, and deny'de
I do beseech you giue him leaue to go
I do not know from what part of the world
I do receiue your offer'd loue like loue,
I do repent: but heauen hath pleas'd it so,
I doe not set my life at a pins fee;
I doubt some foule play: would the Night were come;
I ha't: when in your motion you are hot and dry,
I had my fathers Signet in my Purse,
I had not quoted him. I feare he did but trifle,
I haue a daughter: haue, whil'st she is mine,
I haue a speech of fire, that faine would blaze,
I haue a voyce, and president of peace
I haue bad dreames
I haue beene in continuall practice; I shall winne at the
I haue heard, that guilty Creatures sitting at a Play,
I haue in quicke determination
I haue much to tell thee, Farewell.
I haue seene you both:
I haue some Rites of memory in this Kingdome,
I his foule Sonne, do this same Villaine send
I hold it fit that we shake hands, and part:
I hold my dutie, as I hold my Soule,
I hop'd thou should'st haue bin my Hamlets wife:
I know my course. The Spirit that I haue seene
I know not, lost all my mirth, forgone all custome of exercise;
I know the good King & Queene haue sent for you
I lou'd you euer; but it is no matter:
I lou'd your Father, and we loue our Selfe,
I made to her in Marriage; and to decline
I must be cruell, onely to be kinde;
I once did hold it as our Statists doe,
I pray you go with me.
I pray you now, receiue them
I pray you pardon me
I pray you passe with your best violence,
I prythee stay with vs, go not to Wittenberg
I prythee take thy fingers from my throat;
I prythee, when thou see'st that Acte a-foot,
I saw him enter such a house of saile;
I saw him yesterday, or tother day;
I saw you last, by the altitude of a Choppine. Pray God
I say away, goe on, Ile follow thee.
I say, we will haue no more Marriages. Those that are
I shall not look vpon his like againe
I should be greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.
I should haue fatted all the Region Kites
I should impart a thing to you from his Maiesty
I stand aloofe, and will no reconcilement,
I stand in pause where I shall first begin,
I stay too long; but here my Father comes:
I suffred much extreamity for loue: very neere this. Ile
I thinke it was to see my Mothers Wedding
I thought thy Bride-bed to haue deckt (sweet Maid)
I tooke thee for thy Betters, take thy Fortune,
I was about say somthing: where did I leaue?
I will be breefe. Your Noble Sonne is mad:
I will bestow him, and will answer well
I will come by and by
I will leaue him,
I will requite your loues; so fare ye well:
I will speake Daggers to her, but vse none:
I would not, in plaine tearmes, from this time forth,
I would set downe, and insert in't? Could ye not?
I your Commission will forthwith dispatch,
I'ue seene my selfe, and seru'd against the French,
I, thou poore Ghost, while memory holds a seate
Ieering? Quite chopfalne? Now get you to my Ladies
If Circumstances leade me, I will finde
If Hamlet from himselfe be tane away:
If Hamlet giue the first, or second hit,
If I had playd the Deske or Table-booke,
If by direct or by Colaterall hand
If damned Custome haue not braz'd it so,
If he by chance escape your venom'd stuck,
If he steale ought the whil'st this Play is Playing,
If it be made of penetrable stuffe;
If it be so, as so tis put on me;
If once a Widdow, euer I be Wife
If one could match you Sir. This report of his
If ought of woe, or wonder, cease your search
If she vnmaske her beauty to the Moone:
If that his Maiesty would ought with vs,
If this should blast in proofe: Soft, let me see
If thou art priuy to thy Countries Fate
If thou canst mutine in a Matrons bones,
If thou did'st euer hold me in thy heart,
If thou didst euer thy deare Father loue
If thou hast any sound, or vse of Voyce,
If thou hast nature in thee beare it not;
If with too credent eare you list his Songs;
If you desire to know the certaintie
If you haue hitherto conceald this sight;
If't be th' affliction of his loue, or no.
Ile blessing begge of you. For this same Lord,
Ile boord him presently.
Ile call vpon you ere you go to bed,
Ile change that name with you:
Ile crosse it, though it blast me. Stay Illusion:
Ile doo't. Dost thou come heere to whine;
Ile lugge the Guts into the Neighbor roome,
Ile rant as well as thou
Ile rent him to the quicke: If he but blench
Ile speake to it, though Hell it selfe should gape
Ile visit you
Ile wipe away all triuiall fond Records,
Imperiall Caesar, dead and turn'd to clay,
Importing Denmarks health, and Englands too,
Importing the surrender of those Lands
In Denmarkes Crowne haue worne.
In dreadfull secrecie impart they did,
In eare and eare. O my deere Gertrude, this,
In equall Scale weighing Delight and Dole
In filiall Obligation, for some terme
In further euill
In generall Synod take away her power:
In going backe to Schoole in Wittenberg,
In his true Nature, and we our selues compell'd
In honourable fashion
In hugger mugger to interre him. Poore Ophelia
In ill breeding minds. Let her come in.
In mincing with his Sword her Husbands limbes,
In my hearts Core. I, in my Heart of heart,
In neither ought, or in extremity:
In noise so rude against me?
In obstinate Condolement, is a course
In scuffling they change Rapiers.
In second Husband, let me be accurst,
In the Lobby
In the corrupted currants of this world,
In the dead wast and middle of the night
In the ranke sweat of an enseamed bed,
In thee, there is not halfe an houre of life;
In thewes and Bulke: but as his Temple waxes,
In this distracted Globe: Remember thee?
In which the Maiesty of buried Denmarke
In your Nature Hamlet,
In youth when I did loue, did loue,
Indeed would make one thinke there would be thought,
Indentures? the very Conueyances of his Lands will
Infects vnseene. Confesse your selfe to Heauen,
Into a Towring passion
Into the Chappell. I pray you hast in this.
Into the Madnesse whereon now he raues,
Inuite me,
Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
Is by a forged processe of my death
Is death of Fathers, and who still hath cried,
Is it not monstrous that this Player heere,
Is not more vgly to the thing that helpes it,
Is not this something more then Fantasie?
Is now most still, most secret, and most graue,
Is sicklied o're, with the pale cast of Thought,
Is strick'd in his Arrest) oh I could tell you.
Is the great loue the generall gender beare him,
Is the maine Motiue of our Preparations,
Is there not Raine enough in the sweet Heauens
Is this the fine of his Fines, and the recouery of his Recoueries,
Is thought-sicke at the act
It did me Yeomans seriuce: wilt thou know
It fits your wisedome so farre to beleeue it;
It had bin so with vs had we beene there:
It hath the primall eldest curse vpon't,
It is a damned Ghost that we haue seene:
It is a poyson temp'red by himselfe:
It is an honest Ghost, that let me tell you:
It is most retrograde to our desire:
It is not, nor it cannot come to good.
It is our tricke, Nature her custome holds,
It is; Adue, Adue, Remember me: I haue sworn't
It lifted vp it head, and did addresse
It may be death
It seemes it is as proper to our Age,
It selfe to motion, like as it would speake:
It sends some precious instance of it selfe
It shall as leuell to your Iudgement pierce
It shewes a will most incorrect to Heauen,
It spill's it selfe, in fearing to be spilt.
It wafts you to a more remoued ground:
It warmes the very sicknesse in my heart,
It was against your Highnesse, whereat greeued,
It was the very day, that young Hamlet was borne, hee
It waues me forth againe; Ile follow it
It will be laide to vs, whose prouidence
It will but skin and filme the Vlcerous place,
It's giuen out, that sleeping in mine Orchard,
Italian. You shall see anon how the Murtherer gets the
Keepes on his wonder, keepes himselfe in clouds,
Keepes wassels and the swaggering vpspring reeles,
Kibe. How long hast thou been a Graue-maker?
Killes Polonius
King Dyes.
King hold his purpose; I will win for him if I can: if
King, Father, Royall Dane: Oh, oh, answer me,
Kingdome. To morrow shall I begge leaue to see your Kingly
Knight shal vse his Foyle and Target: the Louer shall
Laertes shall be King, Laertes King
Laertes, and his Sister Ophelia, Lords Attendant.
Laertes, you but dally,
Larded with many seuerall sorts of reason;
Last, and as much containing as all these,
Lay not a flattering Vnction to your soule,
Leaps in the graue.
Least with this pitteous action you conuert
Leaue vs.
Leaue wringing of your hands, peace, sit you downe,
Lest more mischance
Let Hercules himselfe doe what he may,
Let all the Battlements their Ordinance fire,
Let come what comes: onely Ile be reueng'd
Let go, by Heauen Ile haue't.
Let him go Gertrude: Do not feare our person:
Let his Queene Mother all alone intreat him
Let in the Maid, that out a Maid, neuer departed more
Let it bee treble in your silence still:
Let me be cruell, not vnnaturall,
Let me be no Assistant for a State,
Let me not burst in Ignorance; but tell
Let me not thinke on't: Frailty, thy name is woman.
Let me see another
Let my disclaiming from a purpos'd euill,
Let not the Royall Bed of Denmarke be
Let shame say what it will; when these are gone
Let the Birds flye, and like the famous Ape
Let the blunt King tempt you againe to bed,
Let them guard the doore. What is the matter?
Let vs impart what we haue seene to night
Like Iohn a-dreames, vnpregnant of my cause,
Like Niobe, all teares. Why she, euen she.
Like Quilles vpon the fretfull Porpentine:
Like a good Childe, and a true Gentleman.
Like sweet Bels iangled out of tune, and harsh,
Like to a murdering Peece in many places,
Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,
Liues almost by his lookes: and for my selfe,
Lome, and why of that Lome (whereto he was conuerted)
Looke too't, I charge you; come your wayes
Looke where he goes euen now out at the Portall.
Looke where it comes againe
Looke you lay home to him,
Looke you, Ile goe pray
Looke you, these are the stoppes
Lord Hamlet is a Prince out of thy Starre,
Lord Hamlet with his doublet all vnbrac'd,
Lord Horatio, these three yeares I haue taken note of it,
Lords.
Lost by his Father: with all Bonds of Law
Machine is to him, Hamlet.
Mad call I it; for to define true Madnesse,
Mad let vs grant him then: and now remaines
Madnesse in great Ones, must not vnwatch'd go.
Maiesty shall haue Tribute of mee: the aduenturous
Maiesty: this to the Queene
Make Ossa like a wart. Nay, and thou'lt mouth,
Make choice of whom your wisest Friends you will,
Make mad the guilty, and apale the free,
Make thy two eyes like Starres, start from their Spheres,
Make vp my summe. What wilt thou do for her?
Make vs againe count o're, ere loue be done.
Make you to rauell all this matter out,
Makes Vow before his Vnkle, neuer more
Making Night hidious? And we fooles of Nature,
Manet Hamlet & Horatio.
Manet Hamlet.
Manet Hamlet.
Marcellus
Marcellus, the Riuals of my Watch, bid them make hast.
March afarre off, and shout within.
March. Sound
Marke the encounter: If he loue her not,
Marke you your party in conuerse; him you would sound,
Mason, the Shipwright, or the Carpenter?
May Violets spring. I tell thee (churlish Priest)
May be the Diuell, and the Diuel hath power
May doe t' expresse his loue and friending to you,
May fit vs to our shape, if this should faile;
May giue his saying deed: which is no further,
May one be pardon'd, and retaine th' offence?
May sweepe to my Reuenge
Meane time we thanke you, for your well-tooke Labour.
Meet what I would haue well, and it destroy:
Messe; 'tis a Chowgh; but as I saw spacious in the possession
Might by the Soueraigne power you haue of vs,
Might stop a hole to keepe the winde away.
Millions of Akers on vs; till our ground
Mine and my Fathers death come not vpon thee,
Mischeefe
More Relatiue then this: The Play's the thing,
More greefe to hide, then hate to vtter loue.
More honour'd in the breach, then the obseruance.
More then his Fathers death, that thus hath put him
More then in words?
Moreouer, that we much did long to see you,
Most Lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust,
Most free in his reply
Most generous, and free from all contriuing,
Most holie and Religious feare it is
Most necessary 'tis, that we forget
Most throughly for my Father
Most welcome home.
Mother goodnight. Indeede this Counsellor
Mother. But is there no sequell at the heeles of this Mothers
Much heate, and him. Ile silence me e'ene heere:
Must (like a Whore) vnpacke my heart with words,
Must I remember: why she would hang on him,
Must giue vs pawse. There's the respect
Must render vp my selfe
My Crowne, mine owne Ambition, and my Queene:
My Father in his habite, as he liued,
My Fathers Brother: but no more like my Father,
My Fathers Spirit in Armes? All is not well:
My Honourable Lord, I will most humbly
My Liege, and Madam, to expostulate
My Lord, with all the vowes of Heauen
My Newes shall be the Newes to that great Feast
My Pulse as yours doth temperately keepe time,
My Tables, my Tables; meet it is I set it downe,
My Tongue and Soule in this be Hypocrites.
My Vertue or my Plague, be it either which,
My custome alwayes in the afternoone;
My father, me thinkes I see my father
My fault is past. But oh, what forme of Prayer
My head should be struck off
My operant Powers my Functions leaue to do:
My sea-gowne scarft about me in the darke,
My soule is full of discord and dismay.
My spirits grow dull, and faine I would beguile
My sterne effects: then what I haue to do,
My stronger guilt, defeats my strong intent,
My thoughts and wishes bend againe towards France,
My too much changed Sonne.
Nature is fine in Loue, and where 'tis fine,
Nay, come let's goe together.
Neither a borrower, nor a lender be;
Neptunes salt Wash, and Tellus Orbed ground:
Neuer to rise againe: Thy Mothers poyson'd:
Neuer to speake of this that you haue heard:
New lighted on a heauen-kissing hill:
Next your Sonne gone, and he most violent Author
No Faiery talkes, nor Witch hath power to Charme:
No Medicine in the world can do thee good.
No Noble rite, nor formall ostentation,
No Traueller returnes, Puzels the will,
No Trophee, Sword, nor Hatchment o're his bones,
No hat vpon his head, his stockings foul'd,
No in despight of Sense and Secrecie,
No iocond health that Denmarke drinkes to day,
No more sweet Hamlet
No more to vndertake it; I will worke him
No more; and by a sleepe, to say we end
No not to stay the grinding of the Axe,
No reckoning made, but sent to my account
No, let the Candied tongue, like absurd pompe,
No, no, he is dead, go to thy Death-bed,
No, nor the fruitfull Riuer in the Eye,
Noise within. Enter Laertes.
None wed the second, but who kill'd the first
Nor Customary suites of solemne Blacke,
Nor any vnproportion'd thoughts his Act:
Nor shall you doe mine eare that violence,
Nor the deiected hauiour of the Visage,
Nor thine on me.
Nor what he spake, though it lack'd Forme a little,
Nor windy suspiration of forc'd breath,
Northerly
Not of the eye, which their Inuestments show:
Not shriuing time allowed
Note, to the top of my Compasse: and there is much Musicke,
Now falles on Priam.
Now feare I this will giue it start againe;
Now followes, that you know young Fortinbras,
Now for our selfe, and for this time of meeting
Now is he to take Geulles, horridly Trick'd
Now out of this
Now pile your dust, vpon the quicke, and dead,
Now see that Noble, and most Soueraigne Reason,
Now the King drinkes to Hamlet. Come, begin,
Now weares his Crowne
Now what my loue is, proofe hath made you know,
O Shame! where is thy Blush? Rebellious Hell,
O a Pit of Clay for to be made,
O a Pit of Clay for to be made,
O deere Ophelia, I am ill at these Numbers: I haue not Art to
O me thought there was nothing meete
O step betweene her, and her fighting Soule,
O the Recorder. Let me see, to withdraw with you, why
O're which his Melancholly sits on brood,
O're whom his very madnesse like some Oare
O'remaster't as you may. And now good friends,
Obey you Madam
Obserue mine Vnkle: If his occulted guilt,
Occasion smiles vpon a second leaue
Of Bell and Buriall
Of Crow-flowers, Nettles, Daysies, and long Purples,
Of Hamlets transformation: so I call it,
Of Hamlets wildenesse: so shall I hope your Vertues
Of Life, of Crowne, and Queene at once dispatcht;
Of Reuerend Priam, seem'd i'th' Ayre to sticke:
Of accidentall iudgements, casuall slaughters
Of all their Conference. If she finde him not,
Of blew Olympus
Of carnall, bloudie, and vnnaturall acts,
Of death's put on by cunning, and forc'd cause,
Of each vnhatch't, vnfledg'd Comrade. Beware
Of entrance to a quarrell: but being in
Of his affection to me
Of his behauiour
Of his owne iust remoue: the people muddied,
Of his true state
Of impious stubbornnesse. 'Tis vnmanly greefe,
Of man and Country
Of mighty opposites
Of mine owne eyes
Of my true Mother
Of these dilated Articles allow:
Of this his Nephewes purpose, to suppresse
Of this post-hast, and Romage in the Land.
Of those effects for which I did the Murther.
Of violent Birth, but poore validitie:
Of vnimproued Mettle, hot and full,
Of your deere Fathers death, if writ in your reuenge,
Of your precedent Lord. A vice of Kings,
Offences gilded hand may shoue by Iustice,
Oh Hamlet, what a falling off was there,
Oh Heart, loose not thy Nature; let not euer
Oh Heauens, is't possible, a yong Maids wits,
Oh Vengeance!
Oh Villaine, Villaine, smiling damned Villaine!
Oh giue me leaue. How does my good Lord Hamlet?
Oh good Horatio, what a wounded name,
Oh heate drie vp my Braines, teares seuen times salt,
Oh heauie burthen!
Oh heere they come.
Oh horrible Oh horrible, most horrible:
Oh limed soule, that strugling to be free,
Oh most pernicious woman!
Oh my deere Hamlet, the drinke, the drinke,
Oh my offence is ranke, it smels to heauen,
Oh royall knauery: An exact command,
Oh this is Counter you false Danish Dogges.
Oh this is the poyson of deepe greefe, it springs
Oh thou vilde King, giue me my Father
Oh what a Rogue and Pesant slaue am I?
Oh wicked Wit, and Gifts, that haue the power
Oh wretched state! Oh bosome, blacke as death!
Oh, that that earth, which kept the world in awe,
Olde Grandsire Priam seekes
On Fortinbras, he ha's my dying voyce,
On Fortinbras, which he (in breefe) obeyes,
On Mars his Armours, forg'd for proofe Eterne,
On plots, and errors happen
On such regards of safety and allowance,
On wholsome life, vsurpe immediately.
One Scoene of it comes neere the Circumstance
Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,
Or by pronouncing of some doubtfull Phrase;
Or giuen my heart a winking, mute and dumbe,
Or if we list to speake; or there be and if there might,
Or in th' incestuous pleasure of his bed,
Or is it some abuse? Or no such thing?
Or like a creature Natiue, and indued
Or look'd vpon this Loue, with idle sight,
Or lose your Heart; or your chast Treasure open
Or my deere Maiestie your Queene heere, think,
Or not at all.
Or not to crack the winde of the poore Phrase,
Or padling in your necke with his damn'd Fingers,
Or pardon'd being downe? Then Ile looke vp,
Or quit in answer of the third exchange,
Or rather say, the cause of this defect;
Or such ambiguous giuing out to note,
Or that the Euerlasting had not fixt
Or then or then, with such and such; and as you say,
Or thinking by our late deere Brothers death,
Or to take Armes against a Sea of troubles,
Or to the dreadfull Sonnet of the Cliffe,
Or with a little shuffling, you may choose
Or you deny me right: go but apart,
Or, if thou hast vp-hoorded in thy life
Ore-beares your Officers, the rabble call him Lord,
Ouer his Kingdome. You know the Rendeuous:
Ouer the nasty Stye
Our Crowne, our Life, and all that we call Ours
Our Soueraigne Processe, which imports at full
Our State to be disioynt, and out of Frame,
Our Willes and Fates do so contrary run,
Our cheefest Courtier Cosin, and our Sonne
Our hastie sending. Something haue you heard
Our indiscretion sometimes serues vs well,
Our purpose may hold there; how sweet Queene.
Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our owne.
Out of his Lunacies
Out of his subiect: and we heere dispatch
Out of my Weaknesse, and my Melancholly,
Out of the ayre my Lord?
Out of the shot and danger of Desire.
Out, out, thou Strumpet-Fortune, all you Gods,
Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,
Passing through Nature, to Eternity
Passion, you must acquire and beget a Temperance that
Pastoricall-Comicall-Historicall-Pastorall:
Payes homage to vs; thou maist not coldly set
Phrase: but you shall heare these in her excellent white
Pinch Wanton on your cheeke, call you his Mouse,
Play something like the murder of my Father,
Play.
Play.
Play?
Players. Mark it, you say right Sir: for a Monday morning
Pleasant and helpfull to him.
Pluckes off my Beard, and blowes it in my face?
Polonius,
Pons Chanson will shew you more. For looke where my
Popt in betweene th' election and my hopes,
Possesse it meerely. That it should come to this:
Powres the poyson in his eares.
Poysoner, with some two or three Mutes comes in againe, seeming
Pray loue remember: and there is Paconcies, that's for
Pray you be round with him
Prepare to play.
Proclaimes me Bastard:
Promontory; this most excellent Canopy the Ayre,
Prompted to my Reuenge by Heauen, and Hell,
Prouidence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be now, 'tis not
Pul'd the poore wretch from her melodious buy,
Purpose is but the slaue to Memorie,
Pursued my life
Put your dread pleasures, more into Command
Pyrrhus at Priam driues, in Rage strikes wide:
Quarelling, drabbing. You may goe so farre
Queene returnes, findes the King dead, and makes passionate
Queene with
Queene: moult no feather, I haue of late, but wherefore
Quillets? his Cases? his Tenures, and his Tricks? why
Quoth she before you tumbled me,
Rankly abus'd: But know thou Noble youth,
Rapiers and Poniards, with their assignes, as Girdle,
Reads the Letter.
Reason? how infinite in faculty? in forme and mouing
Rebellious to his Arme, lyes where it falles
Receiues rebuke from Norwey: and in fine,
Remorselesse, Treacherous, Letcherous, kindles villaine!
Repast them with my blood
Repent what's past, auoyd what is to come,
Repugnant to command: vnequall match,
Requit him for your Father
Resembles that it was. What it should bee
Respeaking earthly Thunder. Come away.
Reuenge should haue no bounds: but good Laertes
Reuisits thus the glimpses of the Moone,
Rew for you, and heere's some for me. Wee may call it
Rewards, his Authorities (but such Officers do the King
Rich gifts wax poore, when giuers proue vnkinde.
Richer then that, which foure successiue Kings
Roaming it thus, you'l tender me a foole
Roses on my rac'd Shooes, get me a Fellowship in a crie
Rough-hew them how we will
Roughly awake, I heere proclaime was madnesse:
Saue me; and houer o're me with your wings
Say Voltumand, what from our Brother Norwey?
Say, why is this? wherefore? what should we doe?
Scena Secunda.
Scena Secunda.
Scena Tertia
Scene indiuidible: or Poem
Scull of a Lawyer? where be his Quiddits now? his
See thou Character. Giue thy thoughts no tongue,
See what a grace was seated on his Brow,
Seeke for thy Noble Father in the dust;
Seemes to me all the vses of this world?
Seeming to feele his blow, with flaming top
Set your entreatments at a higher rate,
Shall you my Sonne; you haue me, haue you not?
Shardes, Flints, and Peebles, should be throwne on her:
Shark'd vp a List of Landlesse Resolutes,
She married. O most wicked speed, to post
She seeing him a-sleepe, leaues him. Anon comes in a Fellow,
She should in ground vnsanctified haue lodg'd,
She turnes to Fauour, and to prettinesse
She's so coniunctiue to my life, and soule;
Shew me the steepe and thorny way to Heauen;
Shewes it selfe pure. He weepes for what is done
Should be as mortall as an old mans life?
Should haue a backe or second, that might hold,
Should haue kept short, restrain'd, and out of haunt,
Should patch a Wall, t' expell the winters flaw.
Since Frost it selfe, as actiuely doth burne,
Since Nature makes them partiall, should o're-heare
Since loue our hearts, and Hymen did our hands
Since my deere Soule was Mistris of my choyse,
Since not th' exterior, nor the inward man
Since yet thy Cicatrice lookes raw and red
Sindging his pate against the burning Zone,
Sings.
Sir though I am not Spleenatiue, and rash,
Sir, in this Audience,
Sir, this is the matter
Sir, this same Scull sir, was Yoricks Scull, the Kings Iester
Sir, you are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes is at
Sith you haue heard, and with a knowing eare,
Sits smiling to my heart; in grace whereof,
Sleepes
So Lust, though to a radiant Angell link'd,
So Vnckle there you are: now to my word;
So as a painted Tyrant Pyrrhus stood,
So bloodily hast strooke
So by his Father lost: and this (I take it)
So by my former Lecture and aduice
So crimefull, and so Capitall in Nature,
So excellent a King, that was to this
So farre from cheere, and from your former state,
So fast they'l follow: your Sister's drown'd Laertes
So frown'd he once, when in an angry parle
So full of Artlesse iealousie is guilt,
So grace and mercy at your most neede helpe you:
So hallow'd, and so gracious is the time
So horridly to shake our disposition,
So leuied as before, against the Poleak:
So mortall, I but dipt a knife in it,
So much as from Occasions you may gleane,
So much from th' vnderstanding of himselfe,
So nightly toyles the subiect of the Land,
So prosperously be deliuer'd of.
So runnes the world away.
So tell him with the occurrents more and lesse,
So thinke thou wilt no second Husband wed.
So to seduce? Won to this shamefull Lust
So would I ha done by yonder Sunne,
Some little time: so by your Companies
Some sayes, that euer 'gainst that Season comes
Songs? Your flashes of Merriment that were wont to
Spade; heere's fine Reuolution, if wee had the tricke to
Speake lowdly for him.
Speake man
Speake of it. Stay, and speake. Stop it Marcellus
Speake to her Hamlet
Speake to me. If there be any good thing to be done,
Sport and repose locke from me day and night:
Sprinkle coole patience. Whereon do you looke?
Sprung from neglected loue. How now Ophelia?
Spurnes enuiously at Strawes, speakes things in doubt,
Stand dumbe and speake not to him. This to me
Start vp, and stand an end. Oh gentle Sonne,
Stew'd in Corruption; honying and making loue
Sticke fiery off indeede
Still am I cal'd? Vnhand me Gentlemen:
Stood Challenger on mount of all the Age
Stoopes to his Bace, and with a hideous crash
Strengthen your patience in our last nights speech,
Striking too short at Greekes. His anticke Sword,
Subscrib'd it, gau't th' impression, plac't it safely,
Such Loue, must needs be Treason in my brest:
Such as it is: and for mine owne poore part,
Such deere concernings hide, Who would do so,
Such was the very Armour he had on,
Sweare
Sweare by my Sword
Sweare by my sword
Sweet, leaue me heere a while,
T' assume a pleasing shape, yea and perhaps
T'haue seene what I haue seene: see what I see.
Taint not thy mind; nor let thy Soule contriue
Take each mans censure; but reserue thy iudgement:
Take it to heart? Fye, 'tis a fault to Heauen,
Take my leaue of you
Take these againe, for to the Noble minde
Take vp the body; Such a sight as this
Take you as 'twere some distant knowledge of him,
Taken to Wife; nor haue we heerein barr'd
Takes Prisoner Pyrrhus eare. For loe, his Sword
Teares in his eyes, distraction in's Aspect,
Tell him his prankes haue been too broad to beare with,
Tell him that by his license, Fortinbras
Tempest, and (as I say) the Whirle-winde of
Tempt him with speed aboord:
Th' Associates tend, and euery thing at bent
Th' expectansie and Rose of the faire State,
Th' extrauagant, and erring Spirit, hyes
Th' imperiall Ioyntresse of this warlike State,
Th' important acting of your dread command? Oh say
Th' obseru'd of all Obseruers, quite, quite downe.
Th' vnnerued Father fals. Then senselesse Illium,
That Father lost, lost his, and the Suruiuer bound
That Flesh is heyre too? 'Tis a consummation
That I am guiltlesse of your Fathers death,
That I distrust you: yet though I distrust,
That I essentially am not in madnesse,
That I haue longed long to re-deliuer.
That I haue possitiuely said, 'tis so,
That I haue shot mine Arrow o're the house,
That I haue vttered; bring me to the Test
That I haue? He would drowne the Stage with teares,
That I in forgery of shapes and trickes,
That I must be their Scourge and Minister.
That I must call in question
That I shall liue and tell him to his teeth;
That I will speake to thee. Ile call thee Hamlet,
That I, the Sonne of the Deere murthered,
That Rosincrance and Guildensterne are dead:
That Soop-stake you will draw both Friend and Foe,
That Spirit, vpon whose spirit depends and rests
That Treason can but peepe to what it would,
That are but Mutes or audience to this acte:
That are so fortified against our Story,
That as the Starre moues not but in his Sphere,
That beetles o're his base into the Sea,
That being of so young dayes brought vp with him:
That blurres the grace and blush of Modestie,
That both the worlds I giue to negligence,
That can denote me truly. These indeed Seeme,
That cannot be, since I am still possest
That carry but halfe sense: Her speech is nothing,
That does afflict our Natures. I am sorrie,
That else leanes on th' Affaire, pray you make hast.
That euen our Loues should with our Fortunes change.
That euer I was borne to set it right.
That from a shelfe, the precious Diadem stole,
That from her working, all his visage warm'd;
That growes to Seed: Things rank, and grosse in Nature
That ha's no rellish of Saluation in't,
That hath a stomacke in't: which is no other
That he could nothing doe but wish and begge,
That he cryed out, t'would be a sight indeed,
That he is mad, 'tis true: 'Tis true 'tis pittie,
That he might not beteene the windes of heauen
That he should weepe for her? What would he doe,
That he which hath your Noble Father slaine,
That he, as 'twere by accident, may there
That hee is open to Incontinencie;
That if againe this Apparition come,
That is but scratcht withall: Ile touch my point,
That is not Passions Slaue, and I will weare him
That it did seeme to shatter all his bulke,
That it is proofe and bulwarke against Sense
That it might please you to giue quiet passe
That it went hand in hand, euen with the Vow
That laps't in Time and Passion, lets go by
That lend a tyrannous, and damned light
That liberall Shepheards giue a grosser name;
That liue and feede vpon your Maiestie
That makes Calamity of so long life:
That may to thee do ease, and grace to me; speak to me.
That might your nature honour, and exception
That no Reuennew hast, but thy good spirits
That not your trespasse, but my madnesse speakes:
That often Madnesse hits on,
That on the superuize no leasure bated,
That on the view and know of these Contents,
That one may smile, and smile and be a Villaine;
That open'd lies within our remedie
That our Deuices still are ouerthrowne,
That patient merit of the vnworthy takes,
That rots it selfe in ease, on Lethe Wharfe,
That shall not be my Offer, not thy Asking?
That she should locke her selfe from his Resort,
That shew of such an exercise may colour
That shewes his hore leaues in the glassie streame:
That so his Sicknesse, Age, and Impotence
That suck'd the Honie of his Musicke Vowes:
That swift as Quick-siluer, it courses through
That they are not a Pipe for Fortunes finger.
That they doe know my sonne: Come you more neerer
That they may seeme the taints of liberty;
That thou dead Coarse againe in compleat steele,
That thou so many Princes, at a shoote,
That thus hath cousend you at hoodman-blinde?
That thus he suffers for
That thy Rebellion lookes so Gyant-like?
That to Laertes I forgot my selfe;
That vnmatch'd Forme and Feature of blowne youth,
That we are made of stuffe, so flat, and dull,
That we can let our Beard be shooke with danger,
That we finde out the cause of this effect,
That we with wisest sorrow thinke on him,
That with wings as swift
That would not let me sleepe; me thought I lay
That you at such time seeing me, neuer shall
That you bend your eye on vacancie,
That you haue tane his tenders for true pay,
That you know ought of me; this not to doe:
That you ore-stop not the modestie of Nature; for any
That you vouchsafe your rest heere in our Court
That your good Beauties be the happy cause
That youth and obseruation coppied there;
That's an ill Phrase, a vilde Phrase, beautified is a vilde
That's not my meaning: but breath his faults so quaintly,
Thaw, and resolue it selfe into a Dew:
The Apparition comes. I knew your Father:
The Barke is readie, and the winde at helpe,
The Bell then beating one
The Bird of Dawning singeth all night long:
The Canker Galls, the Infants of the Spring
The Cannons to the Heauens, the Heauen to Earth,
The Cat will Mew, and Dogge will haue his day.
The Coarse they follow, did with disperate hand,
The Cocke that is the Trumpet to the day,
The Courtiers, Soldiers, Schollers: Eye, tongue, sword,
The Frenchman gaue you, bring you in fine together,
The Glow-worme showes the Matine to be neere,
The Hand more instrumentall to the Mouth,
The Harlots Cheeke beautied with plaist'ring Art
The Hart vngalled play:
The Head is not more Natiue to the Heart,
The Heart-ake, and the thousand Naturall shockes
The King shal drinke to Hamlets better breath,
The Letter.
The Lists, and full proportions are all made
The Ocean (ouer-peering of his List)
The Oppressors wrong, the poore mans Contumely,
The Origin and Commencement of this greefe
The Portraiture of his; Ile count his fauours:
The Queene Carowses to thy fortune, Hamlet
The Queene, the Courtiers. Who is that they follow,
The Ratifiers and props of euery word,
The Serpent that did sting thy Fathers life,
The Slings and Arrowes of outragious Fortune,
The Souldiours Musicke, and the rites of Warre
The Soule of Nero, enter this firme bosome:
The Sourse of this our Watch, and the cheefe head
The Sun no sooner shall the Mountaines touch,
The Treacherous Instrument is in thy hand,
The Trumpet to the Cannoneer without,
The better to beguile. This is for all:
The bold windes speechlesse, and the Orbe below
The changeling neuer knowne: Now, the next day
The chariest Maid is Prodigall enough,
The counterfet presentment of two Brothers:
The death I gaue him: so againe, good night.
The diuell himselfe
The eares are senselesse that should giue vs hearing,
The effects of what I wrote?
The faire Ophelia? Nimph, in thy Orizons
The flash and out-breake of a fiery minde,
The friends thou hast, and their adoption tride,
The glasse of Fashion, and the mould of Forme,
The great man downe, you marke his fauourites flies,
The head and sourse of all your Sonnes distemper
The hearers to Collection; they ayme at it,
The hey-day in the blood is tame, it's humble,
The insolence of Office, and the Spurnes
The instant Burst of Clamour that she made
The interim's mine, and a mans life's no more
The inward seruice of the Minde and Soule
The kettle Drum and Trumpet thus bray out
The leaperous Distilment; whose effect
The liues of many, the cease of Maiestie
The memory be greene: and that it vs befitted
The naturall Gates and Allies of the body;
The neede we haue to vse you, did prouoke
The nights are wholsome, then no Planets strike,
The pangs of dispriz'd Loue, the Lawes delay,
The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.
The poore aduanc'd, makes Friends of Enemies:
The potent poyson quite ore-crowes my spirit,
The present death of Hamlet. Do it England,
The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose Sable Armes
The sanctity and health of the whole State.
The speech of vantage. Fare you well my Liege,
The suppliance of a minute? No more
The tedious day with sleepe
The termes of our estate, may not endure
The thin and wholsome blood: so did it mine;
The time is out of ioynt: Oh cursed spight,
The triumph of his Pledge
The vertue of his feare: but you must feare
The very cause of Hamlets Lunacie
The very faculty of Eyes and Eares. Yet I,
The very soule, and sweete Religion makes
The violence of other Greefe or Ioy,
The vndiscouered Countrey, from whose Borne
The vnseene good old man
The which he loued passing well
The will of my most seeming vertuous Queene:
The winde sits in the shoulder of your saile,
The woman will be out: Adue my Lord,
The youth you breath of guilty, be assur'd
Theeues of Mercy, but they knew what they did. I am to doe
Their grand Commission, where I found Horatio,
Their owne ennactors with themselues destroy:
Then Hamlet does it not, Hamlet denies it:
Then I to Hercules. Within a Moneth?
Then a command to parley. For Lord Hamlet,
Then are dream't of in our Philosophy. But come,
Then flye to others that we know not of.
Then goes he to the length of all his arme;
Then is my deede, to my most painted word.
Then is the Throne of Denmarke to thy Father.
Then may be giuen you. In few, Ophelia,
Then that which deerest Father beares his Sonne,
Then the maine voyce of Denmarke goes withall.
Then to Entreatie
Then to say one: but I am very sorry good Horatio,
Then trip him, that his heeles may kicke at Heauen,
Then venome to thy worke.
Then vp he rose, & don'd his clothes, & dupt the chamber dore,
Then weight what losse your Honour may sustaine,
Then young Laertes, in a Riotous head,
Then your particular demands will touch it,
Thence to a Lightnesse, and by this declension
Thence to a Watch, thence into a Weaknesse,
There are more things in Heauen and Earth, Horatio,
There falling out at Tennis; or perchance,
There is a Play to night to before the King.
There is no shuffling, there the Action lyes
There my Lord
There on the pendant boughes, her Coronet weeds
There was for a while, no mony bid for argument,
There was he gaming, there o'retooke in's Rouse,
There with fantasticke Garlands did she come,
There's a Diuinity that shapes our ends,
There's such Diuinity doth hedge a King,
There's trickes i'th' world, and hems, and beats her heart,
Therefore I haue intreated him along
Therefore let's follow.
Therefore our sometimes Sister, now our Queene,
Therefore, since Breuitie is the Soule of Wit,
These Foyles haue all a length.
These good Fellowes will bring thee where I am. Rosincrance
These hands are not more like
These profound heaues
These words like Daggers enter in mine eares.
These, but the Trappings, and the Suites of woe
They are not neere my Conscience; their debate
They cry choose we? Laertes shall be King,
They finde vs touch'd, we will our Kingdome giue,
They foole me to the top of my bent.
They had begun the Play. I sate me downe,
They haue proclaim'd their Malefactions.
They play.
They say, he made a good end;
They shall go farre with little
They were giuen me by Claudio, he receiu'd them
Thicke and vnwholsome in their thoughts, and whispers
Thine euermore most deere Lady, whilst this
This Graue shall haue a liuing Monument:
This Physicke but prolongs thy sickly dayes.
This Play is the Image of a murder done in Vienna: Gonzago
This Realme dismantled was of Ioue himselfe,
This Spirit dumbe to vs, will speake to him:
This aboue all; to thine owne selfe be true:
This boades some strange erruption to our State
This bodilesse Creation extasie is very cunning in
This gentle and vnforc'd accord of Hamlet
This in Obedience hath my daughter shew'd me:
This is one Lucianus nephew to the King
This is the very extasie of Loue,
This mad yong man. But so much was our loue,
This maruell to you
This must be knowne, being kept close might moue
This must be so. We pray you throw to earth
This must not be: and then, I Precepts gaue her,
This night to play before him
This presence knowes,
This present Obiect made probation
This sodaine sending him away, must seeme
This something setled matter in his heart:
This vnpreuayling woe, and thinke of vs
This was sometime a Paradox, but now the time giues it
This was your Husband. Looke you now what followes.
This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange
Thou canst not then be false to any man.
Thou com'st in such a questionable shape
Thou find'st to be too busie, is some danger.
Thou hast cleft my heart in twaine
Thou know'st 'tis common, all that liues must dye,
Thou know'st already
Thou liu'st, report me and my causes right
Thou mixture ranke, of Midnight Weeds collected,
Thou turn'st mine eyes into my very soule,
Thou wretched, rash, intruding foole farewell,
Though Lewdnesse court it in a shape of Heauen:
Though all the earth orewhelm them to mens eies.
Though inclination be as sharpe as will:
Though nothing sure, yet much vnhappily
Thoughts
Threatning the flame
Through your Dominions, for his Enterprize,
Throwne out his Angle for my proper life,
Thus Conscience does make Cowards of vs all,
Thus bad begins and worse remaines behinde
Thus diddest thou
Thus it remaines, and the remainder thus. Perpend,
Thus much the businesse is. We haue heere writ
Thus set it downe. He shall with speed to England
Thus was I, sleeping, by a Brothers hand,
Thy face is valiant since I saw thee last: Com'st thou to
Thy knotty and combined lockes to part,
Thy naturall Magicke, and dire propertie,
Till I haue caught her once more in mine armes:
Till by some elder Masters of knowne Honor,
Till of this flat a Mountaine you haue made,
Till our Scale turnes the beame. Oh Rose of May,
Till that her garments, heauy with her drinke,
Till the foule crimes done in my dayes of Nature
Till the last Trumpet. For charitable praier,
Till then sit still my soule; foule deeds will rise,
Till then, in patience our proceeding be.
Time qualifies the sparke and fire of it:
Tis told me he hath very oft of late
To England send him: Or confine him where
To Norway, Vncle of young Fortinbras,
To Reason most absurd, whose common Theame
To an exployt now ripe in my Deuice,
To be a preparation 'gainst the Poleak:
To be commanded
To be contracted in one brow of woe:
To be fore-stalled ere we come to fall,
To beare our hearts in greefe, and our whole Kingdome
To both your Honors
To businesse with the King, more then the scope
To cast beyond our selues in our Opinions,
To cast thee vp againe? What may this meane?
To censure of his seeming
To contract O the time for a my behoue,
To do obsequious Sorrow. But to perseuer
To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather
To eares of flesh and bloud; list Hamlet, oh list,
To feed & cloath thee. Why shold the poor be flatter'd?
To flaming youth, let Vertue be as waxe.
To giue in euidence. What then? What rests?
To giue it due content
To giue th' assay of Armes against your Maiestie.
To giue the world assurance of a man.
To giue them Seales, neuer my Soule consent.
To giue these mourning duties to your Father:
To grunt and sweat vnder a weary life,
To haue prou'd most royally:
To heare him so inclin'd. Good Gentlemen,
To heare of it: They are about the Court,
To heare the Processe. Ile warrant shee'l tax him home,
To heare, and see the matter
To heauen. Oh this is hyre and Sallery, not Reuenge.
To hell Allegeance: Vowes, to the blackest diuell.
To him from whom you brought them.
To his Confine. And of the truth heerein,
To his vnmastred importunity.
To keepe it from divulging, let's it feede
To keepe it selfe from noyance: but much more,
To keepe my name vngorg'd. But till that time,
To keepe those many many bodies safe
To lacke discretion. Come, go we to the King,
To lay our Seruices freely at your feete,
To let his madnesse range. Therefore prepare you,
To let them know both what we meane to do,
To let this Canker of our nature come
To let you know of it
To make Oppression bitter, or ere this,
To make it truster of your owne report
To make them ranke. Forgiue me this my Vertue,
To mine Sprindge, Osricke,
To mine owne roome againe, making so bold,
To morrow is S[aint]. Valentines day, all in the morning betime,
To muddy death
To my Reuenge. But in my termes of Honor
To my sicke soule (as sinnes true Nature is)
To o're top old Pelion, or the skyish head
To offer it the shew of Violence,
To our most valiant Brother. So much for him.
To outface me with leaping in her Graue?
To pay our selues, what to our selues is debt:
To pricke and sting her. Fare thee well at once;
To punish me with this, and this with me,
To put an Anticke disposition on:)
To quit him with this arme? And is't not to be damn'd
To shew his Greefes: let her be round with him,
To shew my duty in your Coronation,
To shew vs so much Gentrie, and good will,
To show your selfe your Fathers sonne indeed,
To sing sage Requiem, and such rest to her
To sleepe, perchance to Dreame; I, there's the rub,
To sound what stop she please. Giue me that man,
To speake of horrors: he comes before me
To take him in the purging of his Soule,
To tell him his command'ment is fulfill'd,
To tell my Storie.
To tell the secrets of my Prison-House;
To th' Ambassadors of England giues this warlike volly
To the Celestiall, and my Soules Idoll, the most beautifed Ophelia.
To the Inheritance of Fortinbras,
To the next abstinence. Once more goodnight,
To the vnsatisfied
To their vilde Murthers, roasted in wrath and fire,
To these delights
To those of mine. But Vertue, as it neuer wil be moued,
To try Conclusions in the Basket, creepe
To wash it white as Snow? Whereto serues mercy,
To what I shall vnfold
To whom he more adheres. If it will please you
To whose huge Spoakes, ten thousand lesser things
To you alone
To you in satisfaction. But if not,
To you your selfe, to vs, to euery one.
To youth and liberty
Together with all Formes, Moods, shewes of Griefe,
Together with remembrance of our selues.
Together with that Faire and Warlike forme
Too oft before the buttons be disclos'd,
Too slightly timbred for so loud a Winde,
Touching this dreaded sight, twice seene of vs,
Tragicall-Historicall: Tragicall-Comicall-Historicall-Pastorall:
Treacherie, seeke it out
Truly deliuer
Trumpets sound, and shot goes off.
Try what Repentance can. What can it not?
Tweakes me by'th' Nose? giues me the Lye i'th' Throate,
Vertue it selfe scapes not calumnious stroakes,
Vertue it selfe, of Vice must pardon begge,
Very well said. Looke you Sir,
Videlicet, a Brothell, or so forth. See you now;
Visit her face too roughly. Heauen and Earth
Vnbated and envenom'd: the foule practise
Vnder the Moone, can saue the thing from death,
Vnder the which he shall not choose but fall;
Vngartred, and downe giued to his Anckle,
Vnhouzzled, disappointed, vnnaneld,
Vnite comutuall, in most sacred Bands
Vnmixt with baser matter; yes yes, by Heauen:
Vnpegge the Basket on the houses top:
Vnsifted in such perillous Circumstance.
Vntill my eielids will no longer wag
Vnto that Element: but long it could not be,
Vnto the voyce and yeelding of that Body,
Vnto yong Hamlet. For vpon my life,
Vouchers vouch him no more of his Purchases, and double
Vp Sword, and know thou a more horrid hent
Vpon a fearfull Summons. I haue heard,
Vpon a wretch, whose Naturall gifts were poore
Vpon my secure hower thy Vncle stole
Vpon our first, he sent out to suppresse
Vpon the Platforme twixt eleuen and twelue,
Vpon the heate and flame of thy distemper
Vpon the witnesse of these Gentlemen,
Vpon whose property, and most deere life,
Walkes o're the dew of yon high Easterne Hill,
Wards, and Dungeons; Denmarke being one o'th'
Warlicke appointment gaue vs Chace. Finding our selues too
Was (as you know) by Fortinbras of Norway,
Was falsely borne in hand, sends out Arrests
Was gaged by our King: which had return'd
Was not like Madnesse. There's something in his soule?
Was our Sea Fight, and what to this was sement,
Was't Hamlet wrong'd Laertes? Neuer Hamlet.
We are arrant Knaues all, beleeue none of vs. Goe thy
We begge your hearing Patientlie
We cannot get from him
We do it wrong, being so Maiesticall
We heard it all. My Lord, do as you please,
We may of their encounter frankely iudge,
We must with all our Maiesty and Skill
We ore-wrought on the way: of these we told him,
We shall expresse our dutie in his eye,
We should prophane the seruice of the dead,
We will bestow our selues: Reade on this booke,
We would not vnderstand what was most fit,
Wee'l make a solemne wager on your commings,
Wee'l put on those shall praise your excellence,
Wee'l put the matter to the present push:
Wee'l teach you to drinke deepe, ere you depart
Weigh what conuenience both of time and meanes
Well ratified by Law, and Heraldrie,
Were nothing but to waste Night, Day, and Time.
Were thicker then it selfe with Brothers blood,
What I haue said to you
What Maiestie should be, what Dutie is,
What a piece of worke is a man! how Noble in
What company, at what expence: and finding
What does this meane my Lord?
What feast is toward in thine eternall Cell.
What forgeries you please; marry, none so ranke,
What haue you giuen him any hard words of late?
What is betweene you, giue me vp the truth?
What is the issue of the businesse there
What is the reason that you vse me thus?
What is't, but to be nothing else but mad.
What might be toward, that this sweaty hast
What might you thinke? No, I went round to worke,
What sayes Pollonius?
What should this meane? Are all the rest come backe?
What thinke you on't?
What thou hast saide to me
What to our selues in passion we propose,
What warlike noyse is this?
What we two Nights haue seene
What would'st thou haue Laertes?
What's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,
What's neere it, with it. It is a massie wheele
When Churchyards yawne, and Hell it selfe breaths out
When I had seene this hot loue on the wing,
When I to sulphurous and tormenting Flames
When Rossius an Actor in Rome-
When downe the weedy Trophies, and her selfe,
When he himselfe might his Quietus make
When he is drunke asleepe: or in his Rage,
When he is fit and season'd for his passage? No.
When he lay couched in the Ominous Horse,
When it prou'd otherwise?
When our deare plots do paule, and that should teach vs,
When second Husband kisses me in Bed
When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport
When sorrowes comes, they come not single spies,
When th' Ambitious Norwey combatted:
When that her Golden Cuplet are disclos'd;
When the Bloud burnes, how Prodigall the Soule
When the compulsiue Ardure giues the charge,
When thou liest howling?
When we haue shuffel'd off this mortall coile,
When we would bring him on to some Confession
When yond same Starre that's Westward from the Pole
Where Ioy most Reuels, Greefe doth most lament;
Where be your Iibes now? Your Gambals? Your
Where euery God did seeme to set his Seale,
Where in necessitie of matter Beggard,
Where is your Sonne?
Where it drawes blood, no Cataplasme so rare,
Where late the Diadem stood, and for a Robe
Where now it burnes, Marcellus and my selfe,
Where should we haue our thankes?
Where thrift may follow faining? Dost thou heare,
Where truth is hid, though it were hid indeede
Where we shall finde him most conueniently.
Where you may see the inmost part of you?
Whereas they had deliuer'd both in time,
Wherein Ile catch the Conscience of the King.
Wherein our Sauiours Birch is celebrated,
Wherein the Spirit held his wont to walke.
Wherein we saw thee quietly enurn'd,
Whereof he is the Head. Then if he sayes he loues you,
Whereon his Braines still beating, puts him thus
Whereon old Norwey, ouercome with ioy,
Whether 'tis Nobler in the minde to suffer
Whether Loue lead Fortune, or else Fortune Loue.
Whether in Sea, or Fire, in Earth, or Ayre,
Which I haue told thee, of my Fathers death.
Which Reason and Sanitie could not
Which are not starling. Tender your selfe more dearly;
Which are to claime, my vantage doth
Which as her winkes, and nods, and gestures yeeld them,
Which bewept to the graue did not go,
Which done, she tooke the Fruites of my Aduice,
Which haue solicited. The rest is silence. O, o, o, o.
Which he stood seiz'd on, to the Conqueror:
Which is the Mightier, in his lawlesse fit
Which let thy wisenesse feare. Away thy hand
Which may to you (perhaps) seeme much vnsinnowed,
Which might depriue your Soueraignty of Reason,
Which now goes too free-footed
Which now like Fruite vnripe stickes on the Tree,
Which time she chaunted snatches of old tunes,
Which was declining on the Milkie head
Which was the Modell of that Danish Seale:
Which we do tender, as we deerely greeue
Whil'st ranke Corruption mining all within,
Whilst like a puft and recklesse Libertine
White his Shrow'd as the Mountaine Snow
Who Impotent and Bedrid, scarsely heares
Who calles me Villaine? breakes my pate a-crosse?
Who dipping all his Faults in their affection,
Who does it then? His Madnesse? If't be so,
Who in her Dutie and Obedience, marke,
Who is't that can informe me?
Who like not in their iudgement, but their eyes:
Who this had seene, with tongue in Venome steep'd,
Who was (if praises may go backe againe)
Who was in life, a foolish prating Knaue.
Who? What an Asse am I? I sure, this is most braue,
Whose Blood and Iudgement are so well co-mingled,
Whose Image euen but now appear'd to vs,
Whose doe you thinke it was?
Whose motiue in this case should stirre me most
Whose violent property foredoes it selfe,
Whose voyce will draw on more:
Whose wicked deed, thy most Ingenious sence
Why day is day; night, night; and time is time,
Why do's the Drumme come hither?
Why may not Imagination trace the Noble dust of Alexander,
Why seemes it so particular with thee
Why should we in our peeuish Opposition
Why such impresse of Ship-wrights, whose sore Taske
Why then belike he likes it not perdie.
Why this same strict and most obseruant Watch,
Why thou art thus Incenst? Let him go Gertrude.
Why thy Canoniz'd bones Hearsed in death,
Why to a publike count I might not go,
Why you proceeded not against these feates,
Will be some danger, which to preuent
Will bring him to his wonted way againe,
Will not peruse the Foiles? So that with ease,
Will nothing sticke our persons to Arraigne
Will sate it selfe in a Celestiall bed, & prey on Garbage.
Will so bestow our selues, that seeing vnseene
Will the King heare this peece of Worke?
Will want true colour; teares perchance for blood
Will you doe this, keepe close within your Chamber,
Will you two helpe to hasten them?
Winde is Southerly, I know a Hawke from a Handsaw.
Winner and Looser
With Armes encombred thus, or thus, head shake;
With Bisson Rheume: A clout about that head,
With Formes, to his Conceit? And all for nothing?
With Hecats Ban, thrice blasted, thrice infected,
With Heraldry more dismall: Head to foote
With Martiall stalke, hath he gone by our Watch
With a bare Bodkin? Who would these Fardles beare
With all his Crimes broad blowne, as fresh as May,
With all my imperfections on my head;
With all my loue I doe commend me to you;
With all the strength and Armour of the minde,
With an attent eare; till I may deliuer
With an intreaty heerein further shewne,
With blood of Fathers, Mothers, Daughters, Sonnes,
With eyes like Carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus
With fierie Quicknesse. Therefore prepare thy selfe,
With hoo, such Bugges and Goblins in my life,
With iuyce of cursed Hebenon in a Violl,
With lesse remorse then Pyrrhus bleeding sword
With mirth in Funerall, and with Dirge in Marriage,
With most myraculous Organ. Ile haue these Players,
With one Auspicious, and one Dropping eye,
With pestilent Speeches of his Fathers death,
With sore distraction? What I haue done
With such dexterity to Incestuous sheets:
With the braue Beast, so farre he past my thought,
With this Slaues Offall, bloudy: a Bawdy villaine,
With this affaire along, for all our Thankes.
With this contagion, that if I gall him slightly,
With this regard their Currants turne away,
With thoughts beyond thee; reaches of our Soules,
With tristfull visage as against the doome,
With true-loue showres
With turbulent and dangerous Lunacy
With variable Obiects, shall expell
With vs, to watch the minutes of this Night,
With which she followed my poore Fathers body
With windlesses, and with assaies of Bias,
With witchcraft of his wits, hath Traitorous guifts.
Withdraw, I heare him coming.
Within his Truncheons length; whilst they bestil'd
Within the Booke and Volume of my Braine,
Within the Center
Without debatement further, more or lesse,
Without the sensible and true auouch
Without the which we are Pictures, or meere Beasts.
Woo't drinke vp Esile, eate a Crocodile?
Woo't weepe? Woo't fight? Woo't teare thy selfe?
Words without thoughts, neuer to Heauen go.
Worse then the mutines in the Bilboes, rashly,
Would I had met my dearest foe in heauen,
Would from a Paddocke, from a Bat, a Gibbe,
Would gamboll from. Mother, for loue of Grace,
Would harrow vp thy soule, freeze thy young blood,
Would haue made milche the Burning eyes of Heauen,
Would haue mourn'd longer) married with mine Vnkle,
Would haue reuerted to my Bow againe,
Would like the Spring that turneth Wood to Stone,
Would make them capeable. Do not looke vpon me,
Would not this Sir, and a Forrest of Feathers, if the rest of
Would quake to looke on. Soft now, to my Mother:
Would step from this, to this? What diuell was't,
Would'st thou not stirre in this. Now Hamlet heare:
Y'are welcome Masters, welcome all. I am glad to see
Yases, that crye out on the top of question; and
Yea courb, and woe, for leaue to do him good
Yea this solidity and compound masse,
Yea, from the Table of my Memory,
Yes faith, heartily
Yet haue I something in me dangerous,
Yet heere she is allowed her Virgin Rites,
Yet must not we put the strong Law on him:
Yet now I must confesse, that duty done,
Yet so farre hath Discretion fought with Nature,
Yet the vnshaped vse of it doth moue
Yet there is Method in't: will you walke
Yet what can it, when one cannot repent?
Yong men wil doo't, if they come too't,
You are the Queene, your Husbands Brothers wife,
You are the most immediate to our Throne,
You cannot call it Loue: For at your age,
You cannot speake of Reason to the Dane,
You do freely barre the doore of your owne Libertie,
You doe not vnderstand your selfe so cleerely,
You doe remember all the Circumstance
You from the Polake warres, and you from England
You go not till I set you vp a glasse,
You good Cornelius, and you Voltemand,
You heauenly Guards. What would your gracious figure?
You laying these slight sulleyes on my Sonne,
You mainly were stirr'd vp?
You must not put another scandall on him,
You must not take for fire. For this time Daughter,
You must not thinke
You must translate; Tis fit we vnderstand them.
You neede not tell vs, what Lord Hamlet saide,
You promis'd me to Wed:
You that looke pale, and tremble at this chance,
You told vs of some suite. What is't Laertes?
You, as your busines and desires shall point you:
Your Grace hath laide the oddes a'th' weaker side
Your Maiestie, and wee that haue free soules, it touches
Your Skill shall like a Starre i'th' darkest night,
Your Visitation shall receiue such thankes
Your bait of falshood, takes this Cape of truth;
Your bedded haire, like life in excrements,
Your better Wisedomes, which haue freely gone
Your leaue and fauour to returne to France,
Your lonelinesse. We are oft too blame in this,
Your sodaine comming ore to play with him;
Your wisedome best shall thinke
Youth to it selfe rebels, though none else neere
[The Tragedie of Hamlet by William Shakespeare 1599]
a Bakers daughter. Lord, wee know what we are, but
a Flourish.
a Progresse through the guts of a Begger
a fellow of infinite Iest; of most excellent fancy, he
a good turne for them. Let the King haue the Letters I haue
a man do, but be merrie. For looke you how cheerefully
a ones Horse, when he meant to begge it; might it not?
a prison
a thousand pound. Did'st perceiue?
a whole Theater of Others. Oh, there bee Players
abhorred my Imagination is, my gorge rises at it. Heere
accepts his
admiration?
after his desart, and who should scape whipping: vse
after.
against sixe French Swords: their Assignes, and three
against the which he impon'd as I take it, sixe French
ago, and not forgotten yet? Then there's hope, a
an Act: and an Act hath three branches. It is an
and
and Aunt Mother are deceiu'd
and Ceremony. Let me comply with you in the Garbe,
and Gauntlets, a Table and Flagons of Wine on it.
and Guildensterne, hold their course for England. Of them
and by what more deare, a better proposer could charge
and drowne himselfe; it is will he nill he, he goes;
and go with vs to the King
and good discretion
and indeed, it goes so heauenly with my disposition;
and not made them well, they imitated Humanity so abhominably
and out-stretcht Heroes the Beggers Shadowes:
and presently
and so I thanke you for your good counsell. Come, my
and the Nation holds it no sinne, to tarre them to Controuersie.
and your leane Begger is but variable seruice to dishes,
anon: 'tis a knauish peece of worke: But what o'that?
answer, I will doe your Mothers command'ment:
are most tyrannically clap't for't: these are now the
are they?
are tickled a'th' sere: and the Lady shall say her minde
are too deare a halfepeny; were you not sent for? Is it
as if I had neuer beene such
as many of your Players do, I had as liue the Town-Cryer
as they are. To a Nunnery, go.
be Lord of Beasts, and his Crib shall stand at the Kings
be a breeder of Sinners? I am my selfe indifferent honest,
be not now; yet it will come; the readinesse is all, since no
beard me in Denmarke? What, my yong Lady and Mistris?
beene a Gentlewoman, shee should haue beene buried
begin. Come, the croaking Rauen doth bellow for Reuenge
being a good kissing Carrion-
best seruice in the end. He keepes them like an Ape in
blesse you Sir.
blessing, but not as your daughter may conceiue. Friend
boorded them: On the instant they got cleare of our Shippe, so
bosome, these
both in reputation and profit was better both
both?
boudge:
bound for England, if your name be Horatio, as I am let
built stronger then the Church: Argall, the Gallowes
buriall
but Gardiners, Ditchers and Graue-makers; they hold vp
but I cannot choose but weepe, to thinke they should
but I thanke you: and sure deare friends my thanks
but to one Table that's the end
but to the matter. My Mother you say
but yet I could accuse me of such things, that it were better
by the Carde, or equiuocation will vndoe vs: by the
call them) that many wearing Rapiers, are affraide of
came to passe, as most like it was: The first rowe of the
cannot keepe counsell, they'l tell all
cannot so innocculate our old stocke, but we shall rellish
carriages, and of very liberall conceit
censure of the which One, must in your allowance o'reway
cheefe Speech in it, I cheefely lou'd, 'twas Aeneas Tale
come, a passionate speech
comes so neere the heeles of our Courtier, hee galls his
conuocation of wormes are e'ne at him. Your worm
could hee digge without Armes? Ile put another question
count my selfe a King of infinite space; were it not that
deale iustly with me: come, come; nay speake
deare to fancy, very responsiue to the hilts, most delicate
declines his head vpon her neck. Layes him downe vpon a Banke
deserue, the more merit is in your bountie. Take them
do them wrong, to make them exclaim against their
do you go about to recouer the winde of mee, as if you
doe's he suffer this rude knaue now to knocke him about
does well; but how does it well? it does well to those
drowne or hang themselues, more then their euen Christian.
dull Asse will not mend his pace with beating; and when
dumbe, yet are they much too light for the bore of the Matter.
eare a hearer: that great Baby you see there, is not yet
edge
either good or bad, but thinking makes it so: to me it is
end both at the first and now, was and is, to hold as 'twer
ere you go to bed
excellent Play; well digested in the Scoenes, set downe
excellent Voice, in this little Organe, yet cannot
fairely outward) should more appeare like entertainment
fashion, and so be-ratled the common Stages (so they
fauour she must come. Make her laugh at that: prythee
finde him not there, seeke him i'th other place your
finde it out.
fitted
flye death. I haue words to speake in your eare, will make thee
foolish eare
for England.
for Ile haue a suite of Sables. Oh Heauens! dye two moneths
for Wise men know well enough, what monsters you
for and a shrowding-Sheete:
for him. Ere we were two dayes old at Sea, a Pyrate of very
for my part, I doe not lye in't; and yet it is mine
for such a Guest is meete
for such a Guest is meete
for thy Dowrie. Be thou as chast as Ice, as pure as Snow,
for you Sir: It comes from th' Ambassadours that was
force of Honestie can translate Beautie into his likenesse.
frame, and start not so wildely from my affayre
freely; or the blanke Verse shall halt for't: what Players
fretted with golden fire: why, it appeares no other thing
from you: wee coated them on the way, and hither are
gain-giuing as would perhaps trouble a woman
go backward
great folke should haue countenance in this world to
great mans Memorie, may out-liue his life halfe a yeare:
guilty of his owne death, shortens not his owne life
ha's teares in's eyes. Pray you no more
had spoke my Lines: Nor do not saw the Ayre too much
hands, come: The appurtenance of Welcome, is Fashion
hardly lye in this Boxe; and must the Inheritor himselfe
hath borne me on his backe a thousand times: And how
hath caught me in his clutch:
haue a Speech straight. Come giue vs a tast of your quality:
haue no more? ha?
haue such a Fellow whipt for o're-doing Termagant: it
he is farre gone, farre gone: and truly in my youth,
he sings at Graue-making?
he suffer not thinking on, with the Hoby-horsse, whose
he will keepe out water a great while. And your water,
head
hee is.
heere lies the point; If I drowne my selfe wittingly, it argues
heere stands the man; good: If the man goe to this water
heere, man and Boy thirty yeares
her into amazement, and admiration
her owne defence?
here he sayes alone: Can you aduise me?
highly (not to speake it prophanely) that neyther hauing
him a-downe-a. Oh, how the wheele becomes it? It is
him. She
him; hee drownes not himselfe. Argall, hee that is not
himselfe, there are no tongues else for's tongue
his Action of Battery? hum. This fellow might be in's
his Fines, his double Vouchers, his Recoueries:
his Maiestie, 'tis the breathing time of day with me; let
his weapon
hold not off
honest
how expresse and admirable? in Action, how like an Angel?
hung those lipps, that I haue kist I know not how oft.
i'th' Vniuersity, you say?
i'th' earth?
i'th' world
if I could see the Puppets dallying
if not, your pardon, and my returne shall bee the end of
if they should grow themselues to common Players (as
if you deny your greefes to your Friend
imediate tryall, if your Lordship would vouchsafe the
in
in apprehension, how like a God? the beauty of the
in that. I will speake to this fellow: whose Graue's
in the Index
in this more then Naturall, if Philosophie could
in tryall
in't?
into dust; the dust is earth; of earth we make
is a sore Decayer of your horson dead body. Heres a Scull
is the Dukes name, his wife Baptista: you shall see
is too vnmannerly
is your onely Emperor for diet. We fat all creatures else
it could not moue thus
it is most like if their meanes are not better) their Writers
it might be Hangers till then; but on sixe Barbary Horses
it to you trippingly on the Tongue: But if you mouth it,
it. Adieu.
it. Go make you readie.
iudgement in such matters, cried in the top of mine) an
kneeles, and makes shew of Protestation vnto him. He takes her
know him: he hath much Land, and fertile; let a Beast
know not what we may be. God be at your Table
laugh, cannot but make the Iudicious greeue; The
lay him i'th' cold ground: My brother shall knowe of it,
lest my extent to the Players (which I tell you must shew
liberall conceited Carriages, that's the French but against
life
light a quality, that it is but a shadowes shadow
like a Camell
longer then they can sing? Will they not say afterwards
look you, this braue ore-hanging, this Maiesticall Roofe,
looke too't
loue of Gonzago's wife
loue.
lyest
mad as he
make of them. To a Nunnery go, and quickly too. Farwell
man ha's ought of what he leaues. What is't to leaue betimes?
man: I am most dreadfully attended; but in the beaten
many pocky Coarses now adaies, that will scarce hold
marke you that? But if the water come to him & drowne
married already, all but one shall liue, the rest shall keep
matter: If we could carry Cannon by our sides; I would
may doe well to thee. Too't againe, Come
may giue it Smoothnesse. O it offends mee to the Soule,
me thought it was very sweete:
meanes
might be my Lord such a one, that prais'd my Lord such
might be the Pate of a Polititian which this Asse o're Offices:
might they not stopp a Beere-barrell?
mock him not. My good Friends, Ile leaue you til night
more Choller
most powerfully, and potently beleeue; yet I holde it
mouth, and it will discourse most excellent Musicke.
murther of Gonzago?
my Businesse
my Fortunes turne Turke with me; with two Prouinciall
my Mother had not borne me. I am very prowd, reuengefull,
my Mother lookes, and my Father dyed within's two
my heart: but it is no matter
name's Gonzago: the Story is extant and writ in choyce
need study a speech of some dosen or sixteene lines, which
neuer Acted: or if it was, not aboue once, for the Play I
nor Woman neither; though by your smiling you seeme
nor no matter in the phrase, that might indite the
not Honestie to haue it thus set downe: For you your
not me?
not sigh gratis, the humorous man shall end his part in
not true. Let me question more in particular: what haue
not, Ile gaine nothing but my shame, and the odde hits
nothing, but inexplicable dumbe shewes, & noise: I could
now: this Scul, has laine in the earth three & twenty years
oddes: but thou wouldest not thinke how all heere about
of Flowers.
of Players sir
of Priams slaughter. If it liue in your memory, begin at
of a Dreame
of dirt
of her fauour?
of hermony, I haue not the skill
of it. I loued you not
of my Mysterie; you would sound mee from my lowest
of spirit, hath sent me to you
of the Play be then to be considered: that's Villanous, &
of the late Innouation?
off.
on't
once: how the knaue iowles it to th' grownd, as if it
one man pick'd out of two thousand
one that could circumuent God, might it not?
ones too, then the length and breadth of a paire of
or Norman, haue so strutted and bellowed, that I haue
or a Carpenter?
or rather you say, my Mother: therfore no more
other Lords attendant with his Guard carrying Torches. Danish
ouer-done, or come tardie off, though it make the vnskilfull
our youth, by the Obligation of our euer-preserued loue,
out of Christian Buriall
out of his swathing clouts
outHerod's Herod. Pray you auoid it
owne Succession
owne. Besides, to be demanded of a Spundge, what replication
pace; But there is Sir an ayrie of Children, little
peace: the Clowne shall make those laugh whose lungs
plaid on, then a Pipe? Call me what Instrument you will,
play the Foole no way, but in's owne house. Farewell
play your Clownes, speake no more then is set downe for
pleasure
preuent your discouery of your secricie to the King and
proofe. I did loue you once
reckon my grones; but that I loue thee best, oh most Best beleeue
remember pleas'd not the Million, 'twas Cauiarie to the
rest of my seruants: for to speake to you like an honest
say on: He's for a Iigge, or a tale of Baudry, or hee
see't. Did these bones cost no more the breeding, but
seeme to know my stops: you would pluck out the heart
selfe Sir, should be old as I am, if like a Crab you could
selfe: but indeed, if you finde him not this moneth, you
sent for; and there is a kinde confession in your lookes;
sent, and repaire thou to me with as much hast as thou wouldest
set the Table on a Rore? No one now to mock your own
shall nose him as you go vp the staires into the Lobby
shall wee to th' Court: for, by my fey I cannot reason?
she is a Strumpet. What's the newes?
shee's dead
shewes a most pittifull Ambition in the Foole that vses
should admit no discourse to your Beautie
should be made by the Sonne of a King
sleepes. Say on; come to Hecuba
slow of Saile, we put on a compelled Valour. In the Grapple, I
some Violets, but they wither'd all when my Father dyed:
something musty.
soone. Good my Lord, will you see the Players wel bestow'd.
speake to him againe. What do you read my Lord?
straight, the Crowner hath sate on her, and finds it Christian
suck't it: thus had he and mine more of the same Beauty
sweet Lord: how dost thou, good Lord? this
takes off his
th' Occasions of my sodaine, and more strange returne.
th'Hyrcanian Beast. It is not so: it begins with Pyrrhus
that I haue seene Play, and heard others praise, and that
that I know the drossie age dotes on; only got the tune of
that I loue passing well
that doe ill: now, thou dost ill to say the Gallowes is
that old men haue gray Beards; that their faces are wrinkled;
that our last King Hamlet o'recame Fortinbras
that she sends you to Prison hither?
that this goodly frame the Earth, seemes to me a sterrill
that was mad, and sent into England
the Abstracts and breefe Chronicles of the time. After
the Age is growne so picked, that the toe of the Pesant
the Ayre promise-cramm'd, you cannot feed Capons so
the Danish; why is this impon'd as you call it?
the Foyles bee brought, the Gentleman willing, and the
the King himselfe, for your Succession in Denmarke?
the Mirrour vp to Nature; to shew Vertue her owne
the Question
the Sconce with a dirty Shouell, and will not tell him of
the Scripture? the Scripture sayes Adam dig'd;
the Tragedians of the City
the Word to the Action, with this speciall obseruance:
the accent of Christians, nor the gate of Christian, Pagan,
the corner of his iaw, first mouth'd to be last swallowed,
the daintier sense
the false Steward that stole his masters daughter
the laying in) he will last you some eight yeare, or nine
the most fond and winnowed opinions; and doe but blow
the onely men
the right breed. If it shall please you to make me a wholsome
the time, and outward habite of encounter, a kinde of
thee well: Welcome good Friends. Oh my olde Friend?
their eyes purging thicke Amber, or Plum-Tree
their ill report while you liued
their repaire hither, and say you are not fit
them after your own Honor and Dignity. The lesse they
them shape, or time to acte them in. What should such
them to their tryalls: the Bubbles are out
them. For there be of them, that will themselues laugh,
then I haue thoughts to put them in imagination, to giue
then your Honestie?
then yours. You are welcome: but my Vnckle Father,
there was no Sallets in the lines, to make the matter sauory;
they aske you what it meanes, say you this:
they comming to offer you Seruice
they say, an old man is twice a childe
thing so ouer-done, is fro[m] the purpose of Playing, whose
this Line, let me see, let me see: The rugged Pyrrhus like
this Quintessence of Dust? Man delights not me; no,
this Sir?
thou shalt not escape Calumny. Get thee to a Nunnery.
thou?
though you can fret me, you cannot play vpon me. God
thought some of Natures Iouerney-men had made men,
thoughts
thousand Tenants
thy selfe-
till he find it stopping a bunghole
time a great buyer of Land, with his Statutes, his Recognizances,
to Dido, and thereabout of it especially, where he speaks
to Yaughan, fetch me a stoupe of Liquor.
to come: if it bee not to come, it will bee now: if it
to fat vs, and we fat our selfe for Magots. Your fat King,
to haue his fine Pate full of fine Dirt? will his
to his Purgation, would perhaps plundge him into farre
to know it is.
to lament
to mee, then a foule and pestilent congregation of vapours.
to play at Loggets with 'em? mine ake to thinke
to say so
to see a robustious Pery-wig-pated Fellow, teare a Passion
to set on some quantitie of barren Spectators to laugh
to signifie this to his Doctor: for for me to put him
to tatters, to verie ragges, to split the eares of the
to thee; if thou answerest me not to the purpose, confesse
to you
to you, that he ha's laid a great wager on your head:
to't like French Faulconers, flie at any thing we see: wee'l
together with weake Hammes. All which Sir, though I
too light, for the law of Writ, and the Liberty. These are
too narrow for your minde
too, though in the meane time, some necessary Question
transforme Honestie from what is, to a Bawd, then the
very substance of the Ambitious, is meerely the shadow
vnlesse the Poet and the Player went to Cuffes in
vnlimited. Seneca cannot be too heauy, nor Plautus
vp, and
vpon this Pipe?
vs not: let the gall'd iade winch: our withers are vnrung.
vs, Sir
way of friendship, What make you at Elsonower?
wayes
wayes to a Nunnery. Where's your Father?
were Caines Iaw-bone, that did the first murther: It
were sent for or no
what Lenton entertainment the Players shall receiue
when I was in the City? Are they so follow'd?
when he needes what you haue glean'd, it is but squeezing
which your modesties haue not craft enough to color,
while my Father liued; giue twenty, forty, an hundred
wife: man & wife is one flesh, and so my mother. Come,
wilfully seekes her owne saluation?
will
will more willingly part withall, except my life, my
will needs be pittied
with a difference. There's a Daysie, I would giue you
with as much modestie, as cunning. I remember one said,
with her. The dead body is carried away: The Poysoner Wooes the
with modestie enough, & likeliehood to lead it; as thus.
with the body. The King, is a thing-
with your finger and thumbe, giue it breath with your
within the ring. Masters, you are all welcome: wee'l e'ne
wits there; or if he do not, it's no great matter there
wittingly
words are not mine
world, the Parragon of Animals; and yet to me, what is
worst
would driue me into a toyle?
yeare. A Tanner will last you nine yeare
yesty collection, which carries them through & through
yet he knew me not at first; he said I was a Fishmonger:
you and him, hee shall not exceed you three hits;
you are ask't this question next, say a Graue-maker: the
you are welcome to Elsonower?
you asham'd to shew, hee'l not shame to tell you what it
you by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy of
you gidge, you amble, and you lispe, and nickname
you make it. Why do you thinke, that I am easier to bee
you make of me: you would play vpon mee; you would
you my good friends, deserued at the hands of Fortune,
you withall; be euen and direct with me, whether you
you, and Spundge you shall be dry againe
your Bonet to his right vse, 'tis for the head
your death, you were better haue a bad Epitaph, then
your hand thus, but vse all gently; for in the verie Torrent,
your owne inclining? Is it a free visitation? Come,
your selfe
your voice like a peece of vncurrant Gold be not crack'd
